As the Rayatz approached his sixteenth birthday,[[1: It was the tradition in the Rebbe’s household to marry early.]] suggestions for shidduchim, marriage proposals, began to arrive in Lubavitch. Some of the propositions were from families of means who hoped to match their daughter to the son of the Rebbe. The family matriarch, the Rayatz’s grandmother, Rebbetzin Rivkah, was intrigued by these prospects. At the time, the financial condition in the Rebbe’s family was difficult. One prospective shidduch was offering a dowry of fifty thousand rubles ($200,000 today), and a significant dowry would necessarily improve the family’s situation. But the Rebbe Rashab had heard that his second cousin in Kishinev, Rabbi Avraham Schneersohn, had a daughter named Nechama Dina[[2: Nechama Dina Schneersohn was born October 24, 1881 (17 Tishrei, 5642) and died January 7, 1971 (10 Shevat, 5731).]] and he was interested in hearing more about her. He asked Rabbi Asher Grossman from Nikolayev to meet the family and prospective bride. Rabbi Grossman’s positive report prompted the Rashab and his wife to consider Nechama Dina as the best choice for their son. The Rayatz’s grandmother still supported the prospect with the large dowry, and so the decision was left to the Rayatz.
The Rayatz told his parents, “The Torah says that Avraham looked for a bride for his only son, Yitzchak, ‘from his father’s house,’[[3: Genesis 24.]] expressing a preference for a relative.” With that, the decision was made, and in June of 1896, the Rayatz became engaged to Nechama Dina in Bolivke, where the family was spending the summer;[[4: Since the bride’s family had limited financial means, the Rebbe Rashab undertook all the wedding expenses. On Erev Yom Kippur 1896, the Rebbe Rashab asked his mother for forgiveness for not following her advice on looking for an affluent match. She responded, “I wish that G-d would forgive all of us the way I forgive you completely.” Shemuot VeSippurim, 2nd edition (Kfar Chabad: 5736), 1:69–71.]] the celebration lasted a week.[[5: The tena’im (engagement) was signed on June 9, 1896 (28 Sivan, 5646) in Bolivke. Copy available in Nisuei HaNesi’im, vol. 1, chap. 8.]] A month later, the Rayatz’s mother, Rebbetzin Shterna Sara, wrote to her cousins in Eretz Yisrael: “The bride, thank G-d, is charming and very observant, and we are hoping that through her, all the aspirations of our holy ancestors will be fulfilled. We gave up major financial benefits [that would have come from the large doweries being offered] for the sake of selecting the most proper young woman who would be an honor for our ancestors.” She added that the wedding was being deferred for a year because “she is still very young.”[[6: Letter dated 1 Elul, 5646 (September 1, 1896) to Rabbi Mordechai Dovber and his son Rabbi Schneur Zalman Schneersohn, who lived in Hebron. She also requested that “when you will be at the holy places to pray before Rosh HaShanah, please pray for our welfare.” The reference here is assumed to be the Me’arat HaMakhpelah. See Igrot Kodesh – Rashab 1:194; Rabbi Shalom Dovber Levine, Treasures of the Chabad Library (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2009), 117.]] In advance of the wedding, the Rayatz completed his studies for semikhah, rabbinic ordination.
Chasidim streamed to Lubavitch for the wedding, held two weeks before Rosh HaShanah in 1897.[[7: September 10, 1897 (13 Elul, 5657).]] The Rayatz donned a shtreimel, the fur hat customarily worn by Lubavitcher Rebbes, and invoked the blessing of Shehechiyanu[[8: This blessing is recited when purchasing something of value, reaching a milestone in life, or eating a new fruit: “Blessed are You, L-rd our G-d, King of the Universe, who has granted us life, sustained us, and enabled us to reach this occasion.”]] before the ceremony. The chuppah was held on Friday afternoon in the courtyard of the main synagogue.[[9: It was the custom for the Rebbe to conduct a chuppah on a Friday.]] Afterward, the crowd escorted the young couple through the town of Lubavitch with singing and dancing. The main wedding celebration continued on Sunday evening in the large study hall known as the zal.[[10: Zal is the Russian word for “hall.” Today, students in many Chabad yeshivas refer to the beit midrash (study hall) as a zal.]]
In honor of the wedding,[[11: It is unclear whether this happened just before the wedding or on the day of the celebration dinner, Sunday, September 12, 1897 (15 Elul, 5657).]] the Rayatz asked his father to open a yeshivah that would integrate the study of Talmud and chasidic philosophy. The Rashab had been considering the idea for some time but was uncertain about proceeding with such an ambitious enterprise. He told his son the proposition was “misnagdishe shtick” (something more aligned with the non-chasidic community). Despite the initial rejection, the suggestion provoked a serious conversation between father and son, and the Rashab said he needed to deliberate over the proposal and pray at the Ohel.[[12: The seventh Rebbe explains his use of the plural “founders of Tomchei Temimim” when he refers to the creation of the yeshivah: “It was my father-in-law [the Rebbe Rayatz] who suggested to the Rashab to establish the yeshivah.” Likkutei Sichot 2:484.]] When he returned, he informed the Rayatz of his consent to open the yeshivah. The Rayatz later referred to the yeshivah as “one of the gifts I requested for my wedding.”[[13: The Rayatz shared this with his son-in-law, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, known as the Ramash, in 1934 (5694) while staying in the health resort in Marienbad; see Reshimat HaYoman, 335. Starting in 1928, the Ramash began to write notes about his conversations with the Rayatz, filling more than five hundred pages with chasidic lore, scholarly insights, and history. Publishing posthumously, they are a remarkable documentation of intimate conversations between the Rayatz and the Ramash over a period of many years. See Torat Menachem: Reshimat HaYoman (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2009).]]
His father warned him that opening such a yeshivah would be complicated. “You should know what you are getting into.”[[14: Reshimat HaYoman, 335.]] These were visionary words. In the decades to come, the yeshivah would play a central role in the Rayatz’s life.
On Sunday, the day of the wedding reception, the Rashab invited fifty of the distinguished wedding guests to a meeting at which he planned to unveil the idea of the yeshivah.[[15: The day of this meeting (September 12, 1897/15 Elul, 5657) is considered the day that Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim was founded. See the Rayatz’s letter as published in Hatomim, issue no. 1 (Warsaw, 1935), page 23; Igrot Kodesh 10:365.]] At 2:00 p.m., the room was crowded with “scholars and leaders, amongst them prominent rabbis, important philanthropists, and people from around the country,” described Rabbi Moshe Rosenblum.[[16: In 1909, Rabbi Moshe Rosenblum, a distinguished scholar, was appointed secretary of the yeshivah. During the following year, he wrote an account of the early history of the yeshivah called Divrei Yemei HaTemimim (“The Annals of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim”); he had access to the original protocols of the meeting, and the Rayatz shared with him many details of the history of the yeshivah in its early years. The account of the wedding in Divrei Yemei HaTemimim was published by Rabbi Yehoshua Mondshine, Jerusalem, 2017, and in Kerem Chabad (Kfar Chabad: 5747), 3:11–14.]] Curiosity filled the air, as the meeting’s agenda remained a mystery.
They were surprised when the Rashab announced his plan to “open a yeshivah for our youth, with proper administration, so that they can dedicate themselves exclusively to Torah study.”
There was no lack of yeshivas in Eastern Europe. The modern yeshivah began with the establishment of the yeshivah in Volozhin in 1803. With time, yeshivas were established in other communities, such as Slabodka, Mir, Telz, and Novardok. These were led by world-class scholars, including Rabbis Nosson Tzvi Finkel, Naftali Tzvi Yehudah Berlin, Chaim Soloveitchik, and others. The vast majority of young Jews spent a few years in a local yeshivah, operated on an ad hoc basis by local rabbis, which varied in quality and educational standards. Few boys remained in yeshivah beyond their early teen years. Only a few exceptional students progressed to the larger, most prestigious yeshivas to continue their studies beyond a basic knowledge of Jewish tradition, law, and philosophy.
Some students from Chabad families also attended these elite yeshivas. Until the inception of the yeshivah in Lubavitch, Chabad students developed their connection to Chasidism in a less formal fashion. “They absorbed the chasidic teachings from their families,” says Professor Ilia Luria.[[17: Professor Ilia Luria, Milchamot Lubavitch: Chasidut Chabad BeRusia HaTzarit ( Jerusalem: Machon Shazar, 2018), chap. 2.]] They would join their parents on their visits to the Rebbe in Lubavitch. The few select senior students who did study in Lubavitch did so informally and were known as yoshvim (literally, “those who sit and study”).[[18: The Rayatz writes that in 1896–97, there was a group of sixteen or seventeen students whose chasidic families had sent them to Lubavitch, but it was not a formal yeshivah. This group would become the foundation of Tomchei Temimim. The tradition of young Chasidim studying in Lubavitch near the Rebbe’s court reached back to the time of the third Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, August 7, 1928 (7 Av, 5688).]] They wanted to be in the Rebbe’s vicinity to absorb the unique spiritual atmosphere in Lubavitch.
The new yeshivah that the Rashab was proposing would be different than the others. He told those assembled, “For many years, I have been considering establishing a yeshivah for scholars of Torah who would dedicate themselves to the study of chasidic philosophy” in addition to the classic study of Talmud. “There were obstacles that stood in the way, but now is the time to create the yeshivah.”[[19: For a letter (not dated) describing the founding of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim, see Igrot Kodesh 10:365; Hatomim, vol. 1 (Tamuz 5695).]]
Historically, yeshivas concentrated almost exclusively on Talmud study, which focuses on the legalistic tradition of Judaism. There was a modicum of attention given to the mystical dimension of Judaism. At the meeting on the day of the Rayatz’s wedding, the Rashab outlined his vision for a groundbreaking educational institution whose curriculum would not only focus on Talmud but also integrate the study of Chasidism, formally and systematically.
Chasidism is not simply an intellectual exercise. Chasidic philosophy seeks to uncover the spiritual meanings behind the study of Judaism and the rituals that lead one to seek and refine a personal connection to G-d. Studying the inner workings of creation and Creator, the spiritual architecture of the universe, and subsequently meditating upon it in prayer (avodah, known in talmudic parlance as “service of the heart”) leads one to a genuine and personal relationship with G-d and infuses one’s study, practice, and even mundane activities with sacred enthusiasm. Concepts that can present a challenge to one’s relationship with G-d – such as faith and trust, free choice, good and evil, and the purpose of life – are grappled with in chasidic thought and are clarified as a means of strengthening one’s connection with Him. This mode of yeshivah study was a revolutionary shift, moving away from the historic approach to classic Jewish learning that had focused solely on the intricacies and nuances of Torah text or halakhic conclusions.
As modernity began to challenge traditional Judaism, some yeshivas had begun to incorporate a spiritual dimension to combat the forces seeking to lure young Jews away from observance. Some yeshivas, such as Telz, Novardok, and Slabodka,[[20: Yeshivas Knesses Yisrael was founded by the legendary Rabbi Nosson Tzvi Finkel in the town of Slabodka in 1877 as a kollel for married men to learn Torah. Within a few years, it became a regular yeshivah for young students. It instituted the study of musar in a systematic fashion, which prompted a major controversy between those who argued that the study should focus exclusively on Talmud and those who supported teaching ethics. Those opposed to the study of musar opened their own yeshivah, Knesses Beis Yitzchak, in Slabodka in 1897, and in 1904 they hired Rabbi Baruch Ber Leibowitz to be rosh yeshivah. In 1921, Rabbi Boruch Ber moved the yeshivah to Vilna, and in 1926 he moved it to Kamenitz.]] instituted the study and practice of musar. The Musar movement, established by Rabbi Yisrael Salanter,[[21: Rabbi Yisrael Lipkin (1809–83) is known as “Salanter” after the town he lived in during his earlier years. He was a brilliant scholar who popularized the teaching of musar as a response to the Enlightenment.]] was based on teaching ethics and emphasized personal behavior, probity, honesty, social welfare, care for others, and meticulous observance of Jewish tradition.[[22: Rabbi Berel Wein, “The Musar Movement” (jewishhistory.org, no. 61); Rabbi Simcha Zissel Ziv, Chakhmah UMusar (New York: 1957), 50 [quoted in Sefer She’eilos UTeshuvos Avnei Chen]. For a detailed historical review of the state of the yeshivas and the debate over the study of musar, see Nathan Kamenesky, The Making of a Godol, revised edition ( Jerusalem: 2004).]]
The difference between the character refinement of musar versus that which is engendered by the study of Chasidism is that musar centers on the individual, either by describing the lowliness of man or by discussing how great he is or can become. Chasidism, on the other hand, focuses on G-d, highlighting the idea that the purpose of man’s action is not just individual perfection but connecting with G-d and drawing down godliness into this world.
When the Rashab concluded his presentation about the new yeshivah, he asked those gathered to “share their opinions and speak from the heart.” Most had serious reservations, Rosenblum says. “The majority thought it was unrealistic.” With the rise of the Enlightenment, Zionism, and political movements, many young people in Russia were abandoning Jewish observance. Those present at the meeting voiced little hope of countering the spirit of the times that was drawing youth away from tradition. Even those who endorsed the idea did so with reservations, saying that the yeshivah should be started on a trial basis to explore its feasibility. Rosenblum writes, “The content of the speeches was similar, each describing the present situation of the young” and concluding that “the idea was unworkable.” Even those who were open to the concept “doubted it would be successful.”[[23: Divrei Yemei HaTemimim, 11–14.]]
There were three reasons for the skepticism, says Professor Luria.[[24: Luria, Milchamot Lubavitch.]] First, “it was a departure from the traditional mode of education.” For millennia, the curriculum of yeshivas concentrated almost exclusively on Talmud; elevating chasidic philosophy to the core curriculum was revolutionary. Second, many young Jews were abandoning tradition. “The majority of the younger generation was under the influence of progressive ideas.” Enlisting enough high-caliber students willing to devote themselves to a serious program would be challenging. Finally, says Luria, detractors feared that “the concentration of gifted students would increase the influence of secular forces, as happened in other yeshivas.” That was the case for famed Hebrew writer Chaim Nachman Bialik, for example, who was lured from observance by clandestine groups of maskilim (secularists) in the famed yeshivah of Volozhin.
That evening, the wedding celebration was abuzz with conversation about the new yeshivah, says Rosenblum. Those attending the meeting shared the details with Chasidim “who had come from hundreds of communities.” Dancing continued into the wee hours of the morning. During the wedding feast, the Rebbe Rashab walked around, greeting his guests and offering a lechayim and blessings to all.[[25: Talk delivered by the Rebbe Rayatz on the last day of Passover 5701 (1941), published in Sefer HaSichos, 5701, 106 (English translation: p. 149).]]
The next day, late Monday afternoon, the group of rabbis and community leaders’ reconvened, and the Rashab asked whether anyone wanted to comment on his announcement. The day before, they had responded with skepticism, but now they sat in silence. Though those assembled were filled with misgivings, the Rebbe himself was not. He understood that the Chasidism that would be an integral part of the curriculum was exactly what would inspire the next generation to remain steadfast in their tradition and fortify them against the temptations of the modern anti-religious influences of the day.
He addressed the crowd: “Establishing this institution will demand much from us, both materially and spiritually – the dedication of our hearts and souls.” He urged them to focus not on the obstacles but on the blessing that would come from the new yeshivah. He, too, was concerned about the state of Judaism, even within the Chabad community, but he felt the yeshivah would only help. “I am deeply apprehensive and pained by the frozen and parched spiritual level of religious Jews.” Their observance lacked passion, he said. “Gone is the fire and excitement in doing mitzvot; their actions are dry and frozen, and everything is done without feeling.” He explained that studying the mystical dimension transforms what could be mechanical observance or a dry reading of legalistic text into a personal and meaningful relationship with G-d.
In an intriguing dichotomy, while the Chasidim expressed skepticism due to their lack of faith in the young, the Rashab had the opposite view, seeing them, as Dr. Naftali Brawer writes, “as the potential of spiritual revival.” With the proper guidance, he believed, “they would be the key to the future of Orthodox Judaism.”[[26: Naftali Yosef Brawer, “Resistance and Response to Change: The Leadership of Rabbi Shalom Dovber Schneersohn” (University College London), part 3.]]
The Rashab was also disturbed by broader societal challenges. Jews were suffering from czarist oppression and anti-Semitism, and religious leadership seemed unable to develop solutions.[[27: Nine years later, on the last day of Passover 5666 (1906), the Rebbe Rashab described his feelings during the year that proceeded the establishment of the yeshivah: “My soul bled from what I observed, and every time I prayed at the holy gravesites of my ancestors, the Rebbes, I would pour out my embittered heart regarding the situation of Chasidim and Chasidut. During the summer of 5656 (1896), I visited the gravesites of our teacher the Baal Shem Tov [in Mezibuzh], our teacher the Maggid of Mezeritch [in Anipoli], the Alter Rebbe [in Hadyach], and the Mitteler Rebbe [in Nizhyn], and when I came back to Lubavitch, I went to the gravesites of my holy grandfather [the Tzemach Tzedek] and my holy father [the Maharash], and with their holy blessing I established the yeshivah.” See Sefer HaSichos, 5701.]] “We need to remedy this,” the Rashab declared.
The new yeshivah would infuse in the students “spiritual values” and instill in them “a sensitivity to godliness.” Integration of rigorous study of chasidic teachings with the standard yeshivah learning, the Rashab believed, would be transformational. “The teaching of Chasidut is a complete Torah that must be studied in depth” and would enrich all aspects of Jewish learning. He explained that chasidic philosophy focuses on “understanding godliness” and “elevating character traits.”[[28: Igrot Kodesh 10:365.]] He wanted to create a yeshivah “where the study of Torah would be done with enthusiasm,” explaining that a passion for Judaism would be instilled “by the study of Chasidism in a systematic fashion.”[[29: Rabbi Menachem Greenglass, chap. 7; Rabbi Zalman Hertzl, Nisuei HaNesi’im.]] This would create a new generation of leaders, self-confident and rooted in Torah values, who would restore spiritual vitality to Jewish life and mitigate the influence of the groups drawing the young away from tradition.[[30: “The Rashab saw the yeshivah as a solution and a barrier to the rise of the negative influences of the Haskalah.” Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Shlomo Roster dated 7 Av, 5688 ( July 24, 1928).]]
Until the inception of the yeshivah, chasidic philosophy had been studied in an unstructured fashion. The Rebbes taught maamarim, which were recorded by chozrim, oral scribes who memorized and then transcribed them, after which they would be distributed to the chasidic community for study. Over time, the new yeshivah created a formal curriculum of chasidic philosophy based on the teachings of the early Chabad Rebbes. The Rashab enhanced the curriculum by teaching a series of maamarim known as hemshekhim, a tranche of maamarim following a common theme. This eventually developed into the structured syllabus that is used today by Chabad yeshivas worldwide.
In addition to studying Talmud and Jewish law for eight hours a day, the students of the new yeshivah devoted four hours daily to the study of Chasidism. They were empowered with an understanding of the classic ideas of Jewish mysticism, and they learned how to apply those ideas to life. In the conventional Lithuanian-style yeshivas, an outstanding scholar was praised as being a gadol (a “great” scholar). In the Lubavitch yeshivah, the goal of the students was to be a penimi, one who had internalized the spiritual values he studied. Identifying a person as a gadol was considered self-aggrandizement; instead, humility and piety in serving G-d were the central values in the yeshivah in Lubavitch.
The faculty was also organized differently than in the standard yeshivas, which were traditionally led by a rosh yeshivah, head of the yeshivah, who was a distinguished talmudic scholar. This new yeshivah was headed by a mashpia (literally, “one who influences”). It was the mashpia’s responsibility to guide the spiritual and character refinement of the students through teaching chasidic philosophy and focusing on prayer and the service of G-d. Initially, there was no rosh yeshivah in Tomchei Temimim, but as the yeshivah grew, additional faculty members were added to fill that role.
Another difference between this yeshivah and others was that the study of pilpul, using sophistry to analyze talmudic arguments that do not always have a practical application, was not encouraged by the Rashab. Instead, he emphasized “knowing the subject being studied,”[[31: Rabbi Shalom Dovber Schneersohn, Kuntres Etz HaChayim [English translation] (Brooklyn, NY: 1946), chap. 27, available at: chabad.org/144473. See also the Rayatz’s introduction to his father’s Kuntres HaTefilla (Brooklyn, NY: 1941).]] analyzing talmudic arguments and their application to real life.
The day after the second meeting in Lubavitch regarding the new yeshivah, the Rashab personally selected the first group of students, many of whom were yoshvim studying in Lubavitch, and appointed Rabbi Shmuel Gronem[[32: Rabbi Shmuel Gronem (1852–1921) was the first mashpia of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim. He educated a generation of Chasidim.]] as their mashpia, with instructions regarding the curriculum.[[33: See the Rayatz’s letter as published in Hatomim, issue no. 1 (Warsaw, 1935), p. 23; Igrot Kodesh 10:366–67.]] The following day, on the auspicious date of 18 Elul,[[34: September 15, 1897.]] the birthday of both the first Chabad Rebbe and the Baal Shem Tov, studies began in Lubavitch. After the holidays, the students and their mashpia relocated to Zembin,[[35: Hatomim, issue no. 1; Igrot Kodesh, 367.]] a town of one thousand residents, most of whom were Jewish, some 160 miles west of Lubavitch. Says Naftali Brawer, “The town was smaller than Lubavitch, and it appears that there may have been fewer distractions for the students.”[[36: Zembin was in western Russia; today it is part of Belorussia. Its Jewish population was annihilated during the Holocaust. Brawer, “Resistance and Response.”]] Over the course of the year, more students joined; the original group swelled to eighteen.
The Rashab suggested that the yeshivah meet all of its students’ personal needs. Customarily, yeshivah students in Eastern Europe were hosted by local families for their daily meals, referred to in Yiddish as essen teg, literally, “eating days.” One family would host a boy or two on Monday, and another on Tuesday, creating a partnership between communities and the local yeshivah. But the Rebbe’s yeshivah provided in-house meals for its students, initially reimbursing the students individually for the cost of their food until it eventually had its own kitchen.[[37: Rosenblum, Divrei Yemei HaTemimim 3:17–18. Some of the students mentioned here are well known; for the possible identification of others, see Yisrael Barda, BaMerchav (2018), 95–96.]]
After almost a year of study in Zembin, the students, accompanied by Reb Shmuel Gronem, returned to Lubavitch to absorb the unique spiritual atmosphere in the Rebbe’s court during the High Holidays season of 1898. “You couldn’t recognize them,” the Rayatz wrote. “They had been transformed.” Their academic and spiritual accomplishments brought his father “great joy,” and he was impressed by their “tremendous changes.”[[38: Reshimat HaYoman, Sivan 5692 (1932); see the letter from the Rayatz to the Ramash as published in Hatomim, issue no. 1, spring 1935.]] The Rashab was interested in the students’ individual achievements, instructing his son to meet with each one privately and then to prepare a series of detailed briefings on them.[[39: See the Rayatz’s letter as published in Hatomim, issue no. 1 (Warsaw, 1935), p. 24; Igrot Kodesh 10:366–67.]]
In Lubavitch, Chasidim from across Russia who had come for the holidays encountered the students of Tomchei Temimim. The cadre of young, passionate, and intellectually gifted students impressed the guests, and the skepticism that had greeted the idea of a yeshivah just a year earlier evaporated. It was replaced by enthusiasm and prompted the Chasidim to discuss the yeshivah’s future and the need for strong leadership. A group of Chasidim led by Rabbi Asher Grossman of Nikolayev approached the Rayatz, then eighteen years old, and asked him to become the yeshivah’s director. They felt he had the “wisdom, motivation, and energy needed to spur the growth of the yeshivah,” Rosenblum writes, adding that when the Rayatz demurred, they appealed to the Rashab. When he endorsed the idea, “the Rayatz could not refuse anymore.”[[40: Divrei Yemei HaTemimim, chap. 4.]] As the yeshivah entered its second year, Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak became its director.[[41: The Rayatz assumed the position on 24 Elul, 5659 (September 11, 1898). See Divrei Yemei HaTemimim.]]
The task facing the Rayatz was complex. He was responsible for raising funds for the yeshivah’s growing budget and creating a stable economic base. He had to nurture the yeshivah from a small group of exceptional students into a full-fledged institution, preserving its high academic standards while expanding the program to include students of diverse ages and backgrounds.
During the High Holidays, the Rashab announced that the yeshivah would move to Lubavitch. With time, branches of Tomchei Temimim were opened in other locations, including Doksycy, Koblitz, and Vitebsk, with the expanding network funded and administered by the Rayatz. The yeshivah was staffed by notable scholars and distinguished Chasidim who were many years, even decades, older than the Rayatz. He hired them, and at times, he discharged staff members who did not live up to expectations. As the yeshivah grew larger and new facilities were needed, the Rayatz found the significant funds necessary for capital improvements.
The Rayatz applied himself to his new role immediately, says Rosenblum, “investing all his strength and abilities.” Lubavitch was filled with holiday guests, and two weeks after assuming the position of director, he convened them on the day after Rosh HaShanah. “He outlined the yeshivah’s successes so far and told how they had seen how remarkably the students developed during the year.” The Rayatz appealed to the guests to be the vanguard, asking that “each give according to his abilities.” He enlisted them in a plan to create a broad-based fundraising campaign, asking them to become activists – “each one, in his city, should undertake to support the yeshivah.”
The Rayatz spent the next few days firming up commitments. “He worked intensely and was able to secure annual pledges of 1,400 rubles (about $40,000 today).” He created an association, named Tomchei Temimim, to galvanize Chasidim from all over Russia to support the yeshivah. Members agreed to be ambassadors of the yeshivah and committed to standards of financial accountability, record-keeping, and specific procedures for transferring funds to Lubavitch. They were also asked to help recruit students. The groups bylaws stated: “If a young man requests to study [in the yeshivah], they should examine him thoroughly: his name, residence, age, qualities, character, and how he acts, as well as his family background and information on where he studied [previously].” They were to forward information about candidates to Lubavitch.[[42: Igrot Kodesh 1:4. “Guidelines for Tomchei Temimim” outlines eleven bylaws for its members.]] This comprehensive strategy, attests Rosenblum, “created many donors.” Support flowed in from across Russia, and during this initial stage, “the yeshivah had no deficit.”[[43: Divrei Yemei HaTemimim, chap. 7.]]
The Rayatz realized that it was crucial to enlist supporters who could donate large amounts. After the holidays, he turned to Yeshaya Berlin of Riga,[[44: Yeshaya Berlin (1852–1907) was a successful businessman who was close to Chabad Rebbes. His wife was a granddaughter of the third Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel. They lived in Riga and had no children. Berlin was involved in community affairs with the Rashab.]] a noted Chabad philanthropist who was close to forty years his senior. He asked Berlin to “make a monthly or annual commitment.” Berlin replied that he had heard good things about the yeshivah and shortly afterward, he met with the Rayatz and the Rashab and made a sizable pledge.[[45: Divrei Yemei HaTemimim, chap. 6.]]
Simchat Torah in Lubavitch was the culmination of the holiday season. That year, 1898, hakafot (the customary dancing with the Torah[[46: Simchat Torah is the final celebration of the annual holiday season that begins with Rosh HaShanah; it marks the conclusion of the annual cycle of Torah reading. It is customary to dance with the Torah both in the evening and the daytime. The dancing is divided into seven hakafot, circuits, and a series of poetic prayers are recited before each dance. The Rashab took the name of the yeshivah from the fourth line in the prayers recited during the seventh hakafah.]]) continued until sunrise. At approximately 4:00 a.m., as they began the seventh and last hakafah, the Rashab paused the singing and exclaimed: “With divine blessing, I have established a yeshivah in which both nigleh [the revealed part of Torah, i.e., Talmud] and Chasidism are studied.” He exhorted the students to realize that embedded in the revealed part of Torah is a deeper spiritual dimension. “They should understand Chasidut the same way that they understand a concept in the revealed Torah.” After singing a melody, he offered a prayer: “The One who gave the Torah should assist the students of the yeshivah.”
The Rashab danced around the bimah (the podium on which the Torah is read), leading the recitation of the traditional hakafot verses: “Tomekh temimim, hoshiya na. Takif la’ad, hatzlichah na. Tamim bemaasav, aneinu beyom koreinu – Supporter of the sincere ones, deliver us. Eternally invincible One, grant us success. Perfect in His ways, answer us on the day we call.” As he completed the circuit around the bimah, the Rashab started to dance intensely. Afterward, he returned to his place in the front of the synagogue and continued to encourage the crowd to sing and dance with great joy.
The crowd grew silent as the Rashab stepped forward to speak. “The yeshivah that was established by the grace of G-d doesn’t have a name. Now I am naming it Tomchei Temimim [literally, “Supporters of the Sincere,” derived from the verses he had just recited], and the title of those who learn and conduct themselves in its spirit will be temimim [sincere, virtuous, complete ones; tamim in the singular].”[[47: Until today, it is customary to use the term “tamim” as an honorific title for a student or alumnus of Tomchei Temimim. It has become so embedded in the communal culture that it is used as a title on tombstones of alumni. Hatomim, issue no. 1, p. 24; Igrot Kodesh 10:3–4, 367–68.]]
After the High Holidays, the Chasidim returned to their cities and towns across Russia and word spread about the new yeshivah. From around the country, Rosenblum reports, “a huge number applied.” The Rayatz instituted high acceptance standards, and applicants went through a rigorous process. The candidates were subjected to multiple interviews and tests with the Rayatz and the Rashab, “to ensure that the students were only the best candidates.” The Rayatz took the approach of building the yeshivah slowly and accepting only top-tier students. In the yeshivah’s second year, just twenty-five finalists were accepted, and they joined only “on a trial basis, and during that time they were tested again.”
Three years after the yeshivah’s founding, in 1900, the Rashab laid out a mission statement. Again, he chose the night of Simchat Torah, the high point of the holiday season. Chasidim who had come from far and wide, including the students of the yeshivah, packed the synagogue. It was late at night when the Rashab turned to his son. He noted that three years had passed since the yeshivah was founded. He compared the students to orlah, the term for a tree’s produce in its first three years; as the tree matures in those first few years, one does not eat from its fruit. “I entrusted to you the directorship of the yeshivah, making you responsible for both its spiritual and material welfare. Our vineyard, Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim, is now three years old, and it has produced fine fruits.”
He asked the Rayatz to have the students rise. He addressed them: “Temimim [the term of endearment used for students of Tomchei Temimim], you are like the soldiers of King David.” He recalled how the ancient soldiers, renowned for their devotion to the Jewish people, would write a bill of divorce that allowed their wives to remarry in the event that they did not return from battle and their death could not be determined.[[48: The divorce was a conditional one, stating that it would only be effective if they did not return by a certain future date. This enabled women to remarry if their husbands did not return from battle, even if there was no proof of death.]] “You should divorce yourself from worldly concerns and make scholarship and spiritual development your priority. The study of chasidic philosophy will instill in you the passion to overwhelm the coolness of the world to sanctify it.” It was the key to “standing strong” for principles and ideals of Judaism, he told them. The Rashab saw the students as the vanguard of Jewish leadership. “We are assured that the students of Tomchei Temimim, wherever they may be in the four corners of the world, will exemplify the quality of self-sacrifice for the higher purpose of creating a dwelling place for G-d in the physical world.”
Rosenblum writes that the purpose of the yeshivah was not just to produce scholars. “There is no lack of great students of Torah.” Tomchei Temimim’s mission was to create a different kind of scholar, one rooted in profound values, “where the Giver of the Torah was embedded in them.” It was to nurture a cadre of students who would be willing to stand up for Jewish principles “with all their strength and vitality.” According to Luria, the Rashab viewed the yeshivah’s role as “producing leaders.” Most Jews were traditional, “but they were passive and lacking inspired direction.” Tomchei Temimim became the institution to change that.[[49: Luria, Milchamot Lubavitch, chap. 2.]]
That night, the Rashab told the students that aside from fully immersing themselves in the study of Torah, they had another responsibility: to disseminate the teachings of Chasidism. He recalled the story of Rabbi Israel Baal Shem Tov,[[50: Rabbi Israel Baal Shem Tov (1698–1760) was the founder of the chasidic movement. He described the story of his soul elevation in a letter to his brother-in-law. See “The Chamber of Mashiach,” available at: chabad.org/380401.]] who ascended to the heavenly realms to ask the Messiah when he would redeem the world. The Messiah answered, “When your wellsprings [chasidic teachings] will be disseminated outward.” The Rashab said that this was the students’ mission: to spread the ideas of Chasidism to the broader Jewish world.[[51: Sefer HaSichos, 5702, chap. 30–31 [Hebrew], 130; Likkutei Dibburim [Hebrew] 4:1560–90.]]
Year after year, enrollment grew – from its first year in Zembin with eighteen students to two hundred just five years later. The Rayatz had to ensure a high caliber of students, manage the growth, and provide suitable facilities for the burgeoning student body. In 1901, he approached philanthropist Yeshaya Berlin and solicited a large gift. With his help, the study hall known as the zal was refurbished, and a dining room and other facilities were built. The budget also grew annually: In 1899, it was 3,120 rubles, and by 1903 it reached over twenty thousand rubles. During those first years, there were financial ups and downs, forcing the Rayatz to secure loans at times. In 1902, there was a deficit of over 1,500 rubles, but just a year later, things turned around and there was a small surplus.
The Russian government refused to recognize the yeshivah, because it didn’t offer courses in secular studies or Russian language, putting it at risk of a government shutdown. The stationery of the yeshivah reflected this, referring to the institution as a seller of books and religious articles. The lack of formal recognition put fundraising in jeopardy, too. The Rashab wrote to his son that if they obtained the recognition, “our hands could be open to receive donations without any fear or concern.” But a major effort by the Rayatz and others to secure government recognition proved unsuccessful.[[52: Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaTzarit (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2010), chap. 122. Hosafot, Tevet 5655, Establishment of Chevra Yavne, supplement to Sefer HaMaamarim, 5665 (Kehot Publication Society, 1982).]]
In addition to the initial skepticism the Rashab encountered from his own Chasidim, opposition arose from the competing Chabad courts in Kopust and Liadi, whose members feared that the new yeshivah would strengthen “the dominance of the Lubavitch stream in the Chabad community,”[[53: Luria, Milchamot Lubavitch, chap. 2. See also a letter that the Rayatz wrote to Rabbi Schneur Slonim on 21 Tevet, 5660 (December 11, 1899) [according to the Julian calendar then in use in czarist Russia], published in Igrot Kodesh 1:9–10, where he alludes to opposition from the breakaway Chabad courts.]] says Luria. “Opposition rose from varied quarters, both internally in the Chabad community and from the progressives and Zionists.”[[54: Luria, Milchamot Lubavitch, chap. 2.]] Those challenges were part of the broader culture war in the Jewish community between traditionalists and the new ideas of the Enlightenment, Zionism, Bundism, and Communism. In the city of Lubavitch, maskilim had opened a secular school, and its director, Gedalia Weinstein, organized opposition to the yeshivah, attacking it in the Jewish media, which caused some to withhold donations.[[55: Weinstein attacked the yeshivah in the Russian-language newspaper Voskhod with a wide variety of allegations, including that the students were not trained for employment. See Luria, Milchamot Lubavitch.]] Nevertheless, Luria says, it did not deter the Chabad supporters who remained loyal to the yeshivah.
Tensions with Zionist activists that had been simmering for some time took a far more ominous turn, coming to a head in 1906.[[56: There were already tensions between Zionist leaders and the Rashab. In 1899, the Rashab wrote a letter that was highly critical of Zionism, denouncing its proponents who advocated replacing Jewish identity rooted in Torah and tradition with secular nationalism. Igrot Kodesh – Rashab, vol. 1, letter 86.]] Berel Davzik, a teenage student of the yeshivah from Chernihiv, began neglecting his studies and became active in the local Marxist Zionist group Poalei Tzion.[[57: Poalei Tzion united Zionism with Marxism and socialism, rejecting traditional Judaism. One of its earliest centers was Vitebsk, near Lubavitch. It was inspired by the writings of Ber Borochov, who consolidated the party in 1906. For more, see Samuel Kassow, “Po’ale Tsiyon,” available at: https://yivoencyclopedia.org/article.aspx/poale_tsiyon.]] Because he was still a minor, the Rayatz telegrammed his parents and asked them to pick him up. Until they arrived, he required him to remain on the yeshivah premises. This angered members of Poalei Tzion, who marched into the yeshivah on a Thursday night[[58: The confrontation took place on March 22, 1906.]] to confront the Rayatz. “We came to inform you that Davzik is a member of Poalei Tzion,” they declared. “We heard that you intend to send him away from here, so we have come to notify you that we won’t allow this to happen.” When the Rayatz rebuffed them, they pulled out weapons and threatened him. “Get out of here! I’m not afraid of your guns,” the Rayatz responded. They left, but they made it clear that the situation was far from over.
Three days later, on Saturday night, they returned, again brandishing weapons. They threatened the Rayatz again, but unafraid, he ordered them, “Put aside your toys.” After a tense back and forth during which the Rebbe refused to give in to their demands, the group retreated outside but threw stones at the yeshivah facility, breaking windows. Then they began shooting at the yeshivah. A bullet missed Rabbi Moshe Klatzkin, the rabbi of Romanov, by inches. As word of the confrontation spread, others joined, swelling the Poalei Tzion mob to two hundred. The yeshivah students heard the commotion and headed out to confront them. As the Rashab writes, “They came from the zal and drove them off. The yeshivah students wanted to attack them, but my son did not permit it.”[[59: Igrot Kodesh – Rashab 4:137.]]
Berel Davzik left the next day with his father, but Poalei Tzion continued to stew in their grievances. Articles misrepresenting the affair appeared in Yiddish papers as far as New York, the writers accusing the yeshivah of fanaticism. They wrote outlandish tales of the burning of secular books in Lubavitch, labeling it an auto-da-fe. Poalei Tzion demanded that the yeshivah fire some of its staff, expel five senior students, and pay them compensation. The Chasidim responded by boycotting the stores of Poalei Tzion supporters in Vitebsk and other communities. The tensions continued to simmer for months, and at one point, the members of Poalei Tzion planned to ambush the Rayatz at the train station in Osha. From inside the train, the Rayatz spotted them. At that time, “I always carried a gun with me,” the Rayatz confided to Yitzchak Goldin years later. He was traveling with Shmuel Katzman that day and told him to get out of the train to warn them. Katzman confronted the group and said, “If you think you are going to start up with the Rebbe’s son, you will suffer a dreadful fate.” Fearing for their lives and seeing police nearby, they fled.[[60: Personal Memoirs of Yitzchak Goldin, Geniza #17, 5754/2024; Rabbi Sholom Dovber Avtzon, The Rebbeim Biography Series: The Rebbe Rashab, Rabbi Sholom Dovber of Lubavitch (Brooklyn, NY: 2020).]] With the continued threat of violence all too real, the Rayatz relocated to Germany until things would settle down.
In the meanwhile, the Zionists continued to make demands, but the Rashab refused to cave in. They resorted to violence again a few months later, raiding the Rashab’s summer home in Bolivke. The Rashab describes the terrifying incident: “Six to eight of them came into the house and others stood outside.” Brandishing revolvers, they exclaimed, “We’ll show you!” The intruders destroyed furniture and ransacked the house while the Rayatz’s young daughters were present with their grandmother. “The children began to cry, and my wife asked that they let them leave the house, but they stood there with guns.” Eventually they left, “but they stood on the road to ensure that no police came.”[[61: Igrot Kodesh – Rashab 4:154.]] The Rashab was forced to hire security guards. The Rashab’s brother, the Raza, was living in Vitebsk, and he negotiated with the members of Poalei Tzion over a period of months. An agreement was finally reached, the crisis calmed, and the Rayatz returned home.[[62: Divrei Yemei HaTemimim, translation by Rabbi Boruch Werdiger available at: https://www.merkazanash.com/pdf/Perspectives20.pdf.]]
Each of these conflicts – the besmirching of the yeshivah by Haskalah (Enlightenment) leaders and the efforts of Marxist Zionists to terrorize the yeshivah and the Rebbe’s family – reflected the underlying conflicts in Russian Jewish life at the time. To the Rashab, the founding of Tomchei Temimim was the antidote to the movements seeking to lure traditional Jews away from observance. His goal was to create a cadre of strong Jewish leaders who could reinvigorate traditional Jewish life. Those who were determined to shift Jewish life away from its historic values realized this and attempted to undermine the yeshivah in any way, even resorting to violence. Luria asserts that ultimately, the yeshivah was successful. “It was able to earn community support and grow from year to year.”
In 1910, the yeshivah took a major leap forward when the Rashab began to seriously consider opening a branch in Eretz Yisrael. From the early eighteenth century, there had been a concentration of Chabad followers living in Hebron.[[63: The Chabad community was founded in Hebron in 1823 by Chasidim who had immigrated earlier to Safed and Tiberias. See Challenge: An Encounter with Lubavitch-Chabad in Israel (Lubavitch Foundation of Great Britain, 1973).]] Rabbi Dovber, the second Rebbe, had purchased a property for a synagogue there. His daughter, Rebbetzin Menucha Rochel, immigrated there in 1845. Her descendants kept up a close connection with the Rebbes in Lubavitch, traveling there regularly.
At the time, the community in Hebron was in decline, with many being drawn to nearby Jerusalem by the housing and financial support offered by various kollels (charitable funds) that would subsidize Torah students.[[64: Colel Chabad, the central Chabad charitable fund in Eretz Yisrael set up by the first Chabad Rebbe, was based in Jerusalem and was, to a large degree, under the sway of the competing Chabad courts in Kopust and Liadi. The Rashab was displeased with the direction of the Colel. Instead of focusing on its historic mission of supporting Jewish scholars, it was diverting funds to other areas.]] But Jerusalem was undergoing a demographic transition due to the influx of non-religious Zionist immigrants, who were changing the historically religious city. Hebron, meanwhile, remained a spiritual oasis still untouched by secular immigration. To bolster the impoverished community and enable its members to remain there, the Rayatz established Chevronim, a special fund to help the Jews in Hebron. (There had been local efforts to start a Chabad yeshivah, but they faltered.)
Leaders of the Hebron community turned to the Rashab to purchase a large property, known as Beit Romano.[[65: Mussi Sharfstein, “Site of New Hebron Neighborhood Was Purchased by Chabad in 1909,” available at: https://www.lubavitch.com/site-of-new-hebron-neighborhood-was-purchased-by-chabad-in-1909/.]] It was originally owned by an affluent Jew from Istanbul who had erected a large mansion on it. Upon his passing, his children put it up for sale. Over a few years, the Rashab raised the necessary funds to purchase the property and navigated through the complicated legal steps to acquiring it. The Rayatz was intimately involved in assisting his father complete the challenging transaction. By 1908, the Rashab was the owner of the large complex and an adjacent property. Combined, this became the base for the new yeshivah and gave the Rashab a strong foothold in the city.[[66: Shlomo Zalman Havlin, HaMashpia: The History of Rabbi Zalman Havlin ( Jerusalem: 1982); Igrot Kodesh – Rashab 1:388–93.]]
In 1911, the Rashab sent a group of outstanding students, led by noted scholar Rabbi Zalman Havlin, to Hebron to establish the yeshivah. The new yeshivah, named Toras Emes, would be the first chasidic yeshivah in the Jewish homeland and was considered a branch of Tomchei Temimim in Lubavitch.
The yeshivah in Hebron had broader societal purposes: to invigorate the study of chasidic teachings in Eretz Yisrael and create a new cadre of Jewish leaders there. Many of the social changes that were occurring in Russia were happening in Eretz Yisrael too, and just as the Rashab hoped the graduates of Tomchei Temimim would set a new direction for Russian Jewry, he hoped the graduates of Toras Emes would do so in the holy land.[[67: In a long letter to Rabbi Havlin and his “dear students” dated November 24, 1911 (3 Kislev, 5672), the Rayatz outlined the purpose of the yeshivah in Hebron. See Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1.]]
The onset of World War I disrupted those plans. With Russia and the Ottoman Empire on opposite sides of the conflict, the Russian students sent by the Rashab were considered enemy aliens in Eretz Yisrael, which was under Ottoman rule. Along with Rabbi Havlin, they were forced to return to Russia. Before his passing in Rostov in 1920, the Rashab instructed Rabbi Havlin to return to Eretz Yisrael as soon as possible. In 1922, he did so and reconstituted the Toras Emes yeshivah in Jerusalem. Today it remains a flourishing center of Jewish scholarship.
The Rayatz was intimately involved in setting up the program in Eretz Yisrael, giving detailed instructions for the curriculum and the acceptance of students. However, he expected that Rabbi Havlin would ultimately take full responsibility. In 1913, he wrote to him,[[68: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter to Rabbi Havlin dated 3 Kislev, 5674 (December 3, 1913).]] “Our approach is to appoint individuals and entrust them with the management, and they are responsible for the projects given over to them.” He explained that this extended to all aspects of the yeshivah, “both the spiritual and financial.”
This method for establishing branches of the yeshivah and this management style were the precursors of the entrepreneurial model of management that would be emblematic of Chabad in the decades to come. The Rayatz and his successor, the seventh Rebbe, entrusted individuals with projects and gave them the autonomy to administer them.
The concept of sending selected students from the flagship yeshivah to establish a new center of learning was similarly an innovation that would be replicated in the future. In the 1930s, the Rayatz sent students from the main yeshivah in Poland to set up branches around the region. Later he did the same in the United States. The seventh Rebbe set up new yeshivas around the globe following the same model of selecting senior students to form the core of the new institutions, beginning with his dispatch of a group of elite students to Australia in 1966. Today there are some fifty Chabad yeshivas around the world, and the approach has been systematized so that senior students are sent from the central yeshivas to satellite branches for one or two years to ensure that the branches have a high level of scholarship and to serve as role models for younger students.
Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim was central to the Rayatz – first in Russia, later in Europe, and then in the United States. When his attempt at establishing a yeshivah in Riga, Latvia (after he was exiled there from Russia) was unsuccessful, he moved to Poland so he could be near the branch in Warsaw. From there, the Rayatz set up a network of yeshivas in Poland and Lithuania. He made the decision to move to the United States only once he felt that establishing a yeshivah there was a realistic goal. During and after World War II, the Rebbe set up more yeshivas in Montreal, Israel, and Europe. He viewed the yeshivah as his lifetime mission entrusted to him by his father.
The Rayatz formally became active in community affairs at the age of fifteen in 1895, and from then on, he served as his father’s private secretary. For a quarter of a century, until the passing of the Rashab in 1920, he was intimately involved in almost all of his father’s communal activities. As his secretary, he managed much of the Rashab’s personal correspondence with Jewish leaders on issues of communal concern.
It was a tumultuous era for Russian Jewry. In 1881, Czar Alexander ll was assassinated. His son and successor, Alexandar lll,[[69: Alexandar III (1845–94) assumed the position of czar in 1881 following his father’s assassination. In response, he was more repressive than his father, enacting the May Laws in 1882 and expanding them in 1885. Among other provisions, these laws prohibited Jews from leasing land outside the Pale, restricted high school and university attendance, and limited mortgages on land. These laws were a major catalyst in Jewish emigration from Russia to the United States and other countries.]] rolled back the reforms of his father and increased his oppression of Russian Jews. A year later, he instituted the May Laws, whose discriminatory polices restricted Jewish residency, stifled their economic growth and educational opportunities, and strengthened the restrictions of the Pale of Settlement.[[70: Originally established by Catherine the Great in 1791, the Pale of Settlement decree was finally terminated in 1917. Its borders shifted over time – at its height, some five million Jews were restricted to the area, which included much of western Russia as well as parts of Ukraine and Crimea. Some Jews, primarily those with university degrees and members of certain guilds, were given permission for residency outside the area. The word “pale” is derived from the Latin word “palus,” meaning a stake or area. See John Klier, “Pale of Settlement,” available at: https://yivoencyclopedia.org/article.aspx/pale_of_settlement.]] When violent pogroms were perpetrated in Russia, the new czar did nothing to curtail them, and according to some historians, he even encouraged them. After his death in 1894, his son, the last czar, Nicholas ll, succeeded him and continued the anti-Jewish policies of his predecessors, claiming in a letter to his mother that the Jews were responsible for Russia’s problems. “The labor strikes are organized by the Polish and Jewish engineers,” he wrote. “The world accuses us of making pogroms, but I believe that the pogroms are a natural appearance. The Jews wish to dominate over Russia and over the Russian czars.”[[71: See “Nicholas II Regarded Pogroms as Natural,” JTA, August 7, 1928, available at: https://www.jta.org/archive/nicholas-ii-regarded-pogroms-as-natural.]] The Jews of Russia continued to suffer greatly under his rule, which ended with his abdication and execution in 1917.
Many Jews sought to flee the harsh reality of life in Russia. Between 1880 and 1920, two million Jews went in search of a better life in Western countries, primarily America. Others within the Jewish community advanced different solutions. Leaders of the Enlightenment championed assimilation. They believed that if Jews would only abandon their ancient traditions, they would find acceptance in Russian society. They backed the development of an educational system that would replace Torah with secular studies. In this way, they hoped to lure the youth away from observance and toward the cultural mainstream; they received support for their agenda from elements of the czarist government as well as from Jews in Western Europe. The Zionist movement offered hope for Jewry in the form of self-governance and a state for Jews in their historical homeland. BILU, one of the earliest Russian Zionist groups, sent its first settlers to Eretz Yisrael in 1882. Many Zionist leaders saw the new movement as replacing the foundations of Jewish identity with secular nationalism. No longer was one required to observe tradition in order to feel Jewish; it was enough to be part of the effort to build a new state. This prompted a schism between them and traditional Jewish leaders, including the Rashab, who strongly criticized Zionism.[[72: Igrot Kodesh – Rashab, vol. 1, letter dated 10 Tamuz, 5659 ( July 22, 1899); Rabbi Avrohom Bergstein, “An Overview of the Chabad Attitude to Zionism and the State of Israel” (JLI Machon Shmuel, 2017).]] Jews also gravitated to the leadership of those advocating for the revolutionary societal reforms of socialism and Communism. There was also the Yiddish movement, which wanted to replace Judaism with a new cultural identity based on language, among many more ideologies and movements.
From the time that he formally assumed the position of Rebbe on Rosh HaShanah in 1893, the Rashab began to reassert the involvement of Lubavitch in communal affairs. Government advocacy for Jews had been dominated by members of the Enlightenment, who shared the Russian authorities’ agenda of assimilation. Key Jewish business leaders, such as Baron David Gunzburg, were Jewish representatives to the Russian government. The Rashab was disappointed by the role played by Gunzburg, who, as part of the Jewish elite in St. Petersburg, was disconnected from the needs of the average Jew in Russia. Prominent rabbinic figures from the non-chasidic yeshivah communities arose in the capital of St. Petersburg as advocates for traditional Judaism. The Rashab, with his son at his side, asserted leadership on behalf of the chasidic community. They drew support from the vast network of Chabad communities around Russia and key Chasidim in St. Petersburg and began to play a larger role in communal affairs.[[73: Luria, Milchamot Lubavitch, chap. 4. The other Chabad courts played a limited role in community affairs. Lubavitch took on a major role during the leadership of Rabbi Menachem Mendel and his successor, Rabbi Shmuel. After his passing in 1882, Lubavitch’s role was minimal. Much of the influence lay with business leaders such as Baron David Gunzburg; Luria asserts that at times, the rabbis attempted to cooperate with them.]]
During this tumultuous time, the Rayatz was thrust into the role of leadership. He was dispatched by the Rashab on many missions, both public and secret. Already at the age of fifteen, he represented his father at a conference of Jewish religious leaders in Kovno in 1895, and again the following year in Vilna.[[74: Rabbi Nissan Mindel, Biography of Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn, The Four Worlds (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2006).]] He repeatedly traveled to Russia’s capital, St. Petersburg, to intervene with government authorities to mitigate anti-Semitic decrees and lobby for Jewish interests. He also traveled overseas to meet with Jewish leaders and representatives of other countries and lobby them to put pressure on the Russians to curtail the pogroms and to implement economic sanctions against them. This communal work, coupled with the Rayatz’s position as head of one of Russia’s most prestigious centers of Jewish learning, propelled him to the center of Jewish communal life. He met important rabbinic figures, influential businessmen, and government ministers.
Most of the activities of the Rayatz were performed covertly, in tandem with his father, and remain clouded in mystery. When either the Rashab or the Rayatz traveled outside of Lubavitch, they would continuously correspond, sometimes daily.[[75: An example of this is a series of letters written over a period of days from the Rashab to the Rayatz in 5664 (1904) about a variety of communal concerns. See Igrot Kodesh – Rashab 4:40–44.]] Sadly, few records of these private communications have survived, but it is clear that the Rayatz was closely involved in almost all areas of his father’s communal activities, playing a key role in bringing his father’s visions to reality. As his private secretary, he managed much of his personal correspondence with Jewish leaders on issues of communal concern.
One of the more dangerous missions the Rashab sent his son on found him battling state-sponsored anti-Semitism. The Rayatz was assigned to subvert the anti-Semitic plans of Pyotr Stolypin,[[76: Pyotr Stolypin (1862–1911) served as interior minister and prime minister in the czarist government of Nicholas II from 1906 until he was assassinated in 1911.]] Russia’s interior minister and prime minister under Czar Nicholas, who was planning to institute a decree that would have an adverse effect on the Jewish community.[[77: The nature of the decree is unknown today.]] The Rashab dispatched his son to the capital of St. Petersburg to find a way to block the measure.[[78: This must have occurred sometime between Stolypin’s appointment as interior minister and prime minister in July 1906 and the demise of Konstantin Petrovich Pobedonostsev in March 1907.]]
The seventh Rebbe recalls, “Once all other avenues did not work, it was decided to approach the Russian elder statesman Konstantin Pobedonostsev.[[79: Pobedonostsev (1827–1907) was a distinguished lawyer and an influential advisor to three Russian czars. He was a member of Council of the Empire and chief procurator of the Most Holy Synod, the operating head of the Russian Orthodox Church. He was involved with the institution of the May Laws that limited Jewish residency and economic activity in Russia. He also supported Jewish colonization in Argentina.]] He had retired from a formal government role, and Stolypin, who was much younger, regularly sought his advice.”[[80: Likkutei Sichot 6:287 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2000).]] Despite Pobedonostsev’s anti-Semitic attitudes, he “had respect for religious figures” because he had been the head of the Russian Orthodox Church. Pobedonostsev lived in a dacha in a suburb of the city, devoid of Jews. The only time he would meet the Rayatz was on a Friday night. At the time, Jews were not permitted to live in the capital without a special permit. As the Rayatz recalled years later,[[81: Talk delivered on Simchat Torah, Sefer HaSichos, 5708 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2001).]] “A few Jewish businessman lived in the city, but none on the outskirts.”
For Shabbat, the Rayatz rented a room adjacent to a bar within walking distance of Pobedonostsev’s dacha. “I gave the owner a large tip, and he agreed to escort me to the appointment.” Despite the harsh weather, they navigated the forested area in the dark night. Pobedonostsev was surprised that the Rayatz actually came. “You are your parents’ only son,” he said. “My dogs could have ripped you apart.” The Rayatz retorted, “A Jew should not fear a dog. The dog should fear the Jew.” As a senior government official, Pobedonostsev had a special pass to access government offices, and the Rayatz convinced him to lend him his pass for the government ministry in St. Petersburg.
The Rayatz turned up at the ministry, surprising the guard with his special pass. It was midday, and many of the staff were out for lunch. Once inside, the Rayatz made his way to the office of the minister responsible for the unfavorable edict. Finding no one there, he entered and searched the minister’s desk for the document he had prepared for approval. When he found it, he stamped it “Rejected,” placed it in the outbox, and quietly exited the building.
The seventh Rebbe reflected years later, “It is difficult to imagine the Rayatz in a bar with Russian drunkards, particularly on the holy Shabbat. But he did all of this because he might revoke a decree against Jews.” The Rayatz explained that this principle of putting oneself at risk for the sake of the community was instilled in him by his father. “After this incident, two prominent Chasidim, Yeshaya Berlin and Yaakov Horowitz, asked my father how he could justify sending me on such dangerous missions.” The Rashab responded to them, “The mission must be achieved irrespective of the risks. The purpose of a soul coming into this world is realized when a Jew undertakes self-sacrifice for G-d, and I am confident he will live a long life.”[[82: Sefer HaSichos, 5708.]]
Education was the primary battlefield for the future of Russian Jewry. For many years, the Enlightenment had been pushing to secularize the educational system in Russia. In 1843, Max Lilienthal,[[83: Max Lilienthal (1815–92) founded a secular Jewish school in Riga and befriended Russia’s education minister, Count Sergei S. Uvarov. With Uvarov’s backing, in 1843 Lilienthal organized a conference to revamp Jewish education in Russia. His plans were blocked by Rabbi Menachem Mendel. Afterward, Lilienthal immigrated to the United States, where he became right-hand man to Isaac Mayer Weiss, the founder of the Reform movement in America. For more on the 1843 conference, see Mordechai Rubin, “The 1843 Battle Over Jewish Education,” available at: chabad.org/5999330; The Tzemach Tzedek and the Haskalah Movement: From the Diary of Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak of Lubavitch (Kehot Publication Society).]] a German Enlightenment activist, orchestrated a government-backed conference in St. Petersburg to institute a plan to secularize the Jewish educational system in the country. The third Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel, played a key role in that conference, blocking Lilienthal’s plans.
In 1863, the secularists set up an organization called Chevrah Mefitzei Haskalah (Society to Promote the Enlightenment), known by its acronym, Chamah. It was backed by some of Russia’s wealthiest Jews.[[84: These included Baron Joseph Gunzburg, the organization’s president, his son Horace (Naftali Hertz) Gunzburg, the vice president, Abraham Brodsky, Lev Rosenthal, and others. See Brian Horowitz, “Society for the Promotion of Culture Among the Jews of Russia,” available at: https://yivoencyclopedia.org/article.aspx/Society_for_the_Promotion_of_Culture_among_the_Jews_of_Russia.]] Baron Horace (Naftali Hertz) Gunzburg, and later his son Baron David Gunzburg,[[85: For more on the Gunzburg dynasty, see Lorraine de Meaux, The Gunzburgs: A Family Biography (Halban Publishers, 2019).]] were seen by the czarist government as the premier representatives of the Jewish community; they both took leadership roles in the organization. Chamah’s goal was to promote the assimilation of Jews into Russian society. Starting in the 1890s, the organization began to expand its campaign, setting up schools with minimal Jewish instruction. At first, their success was marginal, but with time they gained momentum, and by 1900, they boasted 150 schools.
They even targeted the town of Lubavitch, sending Enlightenment activist Mordechai Ben Hillel to explore the possibilities of opening a school there in 1897. He reported that because the community was the bastion of chasidic life, a school there would have a large impact. “Lubavitch is visited by thousands annually. It is important to establish a school there, as its influence will not be only on the residents of Lubavitch but on all of Russian Jewry.”[[86: Luria, Milchamot Lubavitch, chap. 4. Luria cites a letter from the documents of the Chevrah Mefitzei Haskalah in the Russian National Archives in St. Petersburg.]] With the support of Baron Gunzburg, the school opened with 130 students, despite the Rashab’s opposition.[[87: A series of letters from the Rashab to Baron Horace Gunzburg lamented the negative influence of the Enlightenment schools. The letters refer to meetings between the two men, apparently in 1896 and again in 1899, in St. Petersburg. The Rashab’s letters are in Hebrew, which Gunzburg understood. See Igrot Kodesh – Rashab 1:190, 192; Luria, Milchamot Lubavitch, chap. 4; and “Guardian of Jewish Education: The Rebbe Rashab’s Mission,” Perspectives Magazine, issue no. 21, available at: https://www.merkazanash.com/perspectives-magazine.]] According to Luria, “The school in Lubavitch became an ideological objective.” Yisrael Jacobson, who was a student in Lubavitch, recalls that shortly afterward, at a major farbrengen, the Rashab spoke bitterly about Gunzburg’s support of the school. “I requested of him that he ‘give me Yavneh’ [referring to Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai’s ancient request of Emperor Vespasian to spare the scholars of the city of Yavneh when he destroyed the Temple in Jerusalem]. At least in Lubavitch, there should not be a school [promoting assimilation]. He did not heed my request.”[[88: Farbrengen on 19 Kislev, 5699 (December 3, 1898). See Zikhron Livnei Yisrael – Memoirs of Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson: 1907–1939 [Hebrew] (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1996), chap. 4; Rabbi Rafael Kahn, Lubavitch VeChayalehah (Kfar Chabad, Israel: 1983), 37.]]
Chamah’s campaign to open schools expanded further when, in 1900, the Jewish Colonial Association (JCA) in Paris pledged 1 million francs to support the development of Enlightenment schools in Russia.[[89: Perspectives Magazine, issues no. 22 and 23, available at: https://www.merkazanash.com/perspectives-magazine.]] The Rashab, with the help of the Rayatz, organized an international lobbying effort to block the funding. They enlisted the support of prominent rabbis in Russia and France, petitioning the JCA in Paris to withhold the funds. Ultimately, they were successful in blocking a second allocation of 600,000 francs.
With the help of the Polyakov brothers, they convinced the JCA to divert the funds toward creating economic opportunities for Russian Jews.[[90: Avtzon, The Rebbe Rashab, chapter titled “Battling the Maskilim.”]] The Rayatz was tasked by his father in 1901 to open a textile mill in Dubrovno, some sixty miles from Lubavitch, using funds from the JCA. The Rayatz spent a year setting up the factory, traveling extensively to get it off the ground.[[91: Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, HaYom Yom (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2005).]] Gershon Kranzler notes that in order to succeed in this ambitious project, the Rayatz had to “enlist support from all camps in the Jewish community,” both Chasidim and mitnagdim. He adds that the project had a broad impact, as “it removed the social stigma from those who worked in the factories.” In the years that followed, the mill – which was closed on Shabbat[[92: “Dubrovno,” available at: https://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/dubrovno.]] – provided two thousand local Jews with gainful employment and “a place in the industrial economy.”[[93: Gershon Kranzler, The Lubavitcher, Mindel Archives.]]
In 1904, war broke out between Japan and Russia over control of the Far East regions of Manchuria and Korea. Thousands of Jewish soldiers were enlisted in the Russian army and fought for two years before suffering an inglorious defeat. The Rashab was concerned about the Jewish soldiers, thousands of miles from home, with no food or matzah for Passover. With the help of the Rayatz, he launched an initiative to meet the soldiers’ Passover needs, with limited success. The following year, they intensified their efforts. They faced many obstacles: an anti-Semitic regime, the need to create a broad-based Jewish coalition to lobby the government, the logistical nightmare of shipping supplies thousands of miles to the Far East, the distribution to soldiers dispersed over a broad geographical area, and securing the necessary funds. After much effort, permission was obtained from the czarist government, and Passover supplies were shipped and distributed throughout the Far East front. The Rayatz was heavily involved in the lobbying and funding, ensuring that the needs of Russian Jewish soldiers would be met.[[94: Eli Rubin, “The Chinese Matzah Campaign of 1905,” available at: chabad.org/2174130; Hosafot, Sefer HaMaamarim, 5665; Schneersohn, HaYom Yom.]]
In the summer of 1905, the Rayatz participated in a covert meeting of prominent rabbinic leaders in St. Petersburg. The agenda: to create a strategy to stem the tide of pogroms that had erupted across Russia against the Jews.[[95: A report of the meeting appears in Igrot Kodesh 6:393. The 1905 meeting was also mentioned years later at a 1943 meeting of rabbis about refugee children in Eretz Yisrael; participants were said to have included the Rashab, Rabbi Chaim Brisker, Rabbi David Katznellenbogen, and others.]] Pressure from outside Russia was essential, Kranzler writes, and so the Rayatz was sent to Western Europe[[96: Schneersohn, HaYom Yom.]] to meet “famous statesman of Germany and Holland, to induce them to intervene with the Russian government.” Despite his young age – only twenty-five – “the Rayatz accomplished his mission beyond all expectations.” He also persuaded foreign bankers to apply economic pressure, proving he could be “a modern shtadlan (advocate) on the international Jewish scene.”[[97: Historically, a shtadlan would advocate with government and business leaders on behalf of Jewish interests. In monarchies, the shtadlan had little real political power, unlike lobbyists in modern representative democracies. They had to rely on persuasion and diplomacy. Kranzler, The Lubavitcher.]]
The Russian government decided to host a conference of rabbis and community leaders to set the direction for Jewish community life and finally put to rest two major issues that had been festering for years: community leadership and education. There had been a long-simmering conflict over the position of rabbis in Russia. Starting in the 1820s, the government began to take an active role in shaping Jewish community leadership by appointing “crown rabbis.” These were Russian-speaking rabbis who registered weddings and lifecycle events and served as liasons between the authorities and the Jewish community. The primary requirement for the job was the ability to read and write in Russian. They were known in Hebrew as a rav mitaam, a derogatory Hebrew term meaning “rabbis on behalf ” (of the government). Almost anyone could qualify, and a large percentage of those appointed were not knowledgeable in Jewish tradition and were in fact poor role models of Jewish observance. The system was rife with corruption, as anyone with political connections could secure the position. Professor Antony Polonsky claims that “some crown rabbis resorted to charging high fees for their services.”[[98: Antony Polonsky, The Jews in Poland and Russia: 1881–1914 (London: The Littman Library of Jewish Civilization, 2010), vol. 2, chap. 8.]]
In the coming years, the government formalized this process, even establishing “rabbinical schools” in Vilna and Zhytomyr in 1847. These schools were heavily influenced by the Enlightenment, and their graduates were poorly regarded by the Jewish public. The schools eventually closed, but the problem of the crown rabbis still festered. Operating alongside them, at times cooperatively and at times with tension, were the true spiritual leaders, many great scholars who, while not fluent in Russian, were respected by their communities for their erudition and ethical behavior.
The double rabbinate became a flashpoint between observant Jews and Enlightenment activists. Communities saw the crown rabbis as a tool to marginalize traditional rabbis and advance the secularists’ agenda backed by government authority. Judah Leib Katzenelson justified the institution of the crown rabbis in a piece he wrote for the secular paper Voskhod, where he maintained that the unregulated traditional rabbinate was “abnormal and required immediate and fundamental reform.”[[99: Voskhod, no. 6 (1904).]]
He and others claimed they wanted to professionalize the rabbinate by making secular education a requirement for ordination. This proposal was met with resistance from the great Jewish scholars, including the Rashab.
The date and location for the government-rabbinic conference was set for St. Petersburg in 1910. The traditional rabbis, representatives of the crown rabbis, and community leaders were all invited to seek a consensus. There had been other rabbinic conferences in the past, but a meeting of this kind, with full government sanction, was unprecedented. The Rashab was named as one of the conference organizers. His son was at his side throughout the process.
Planning began well in advance. In October of 1908, the Rashab asked the Rayatz to organize a confidential meeting of a small group of rabbis closely aligned with Chabad to strategize a way forward and develop a consensus. There were a variety of issues to address before the St. Petersburg conference. Because of the political disruption in Russia, the czar had agreed to an election for the first time. As the Rayatz writes, they needed to strategize “the manner and extent of our involvement in preparation for the elections in the forthcoming duma (parliament).”[[100: Likkutei Dibburim, vol. 1, chap. 5b.]]
Due to the efforts of the Rashab, in coordination with Rabbi Chaim Ozer Grodzinski,[[101: Rabbi Chaim Ozer Grodzinski (1863–1940), was the dayan (chief judge) of the rabbinical court of Vilnius. Universally respected as one of the leading rabbis of the world and a great scholar and community leader, he represented the traditional yeshivah community. The Rashab and the Rayatz had great esteem for Rabbi Chaim Ozer and worked closely with him on communal issues.]] Lithuania’s leading rabbi, the government granted permission for a pre-conference meeting of twenty-five leading rabbis. They convened in Vilna in May 1909 with the goal of setting an agenda for the conference. The Rayatz was named secretary of the meeting.[[102: For a detailed review of the conference, see Rabban Shel Kol Benei HaGola ( Jerusalem: 5881), chap. 13.]] Finally, in 1910, the national conference was held in St. Petersburg. Throughout the conference, the Rayatz assisted his father and spent much time with the renowned rabbis, including Rabbi Grodzinski, Rabbi Chaim Soloveitchik (the Brisker Rav), Rabbi Yisrael of Radin (the Chafetz Chaim), the Gerrer Rebbe, and others.[[103: Rabbi Chaim Soloveitchik, known as Reb Chaim Brisker (1853–1918), was a great scholar. Rabbi Yisrael Meir of Radin, known as the Chafetz Chaim (1838–1933), was one of the leading Lithuanian rabbis in Europe. The fourth Gerrer Rebbe, Rabbi Avraham Mordechai Alter, known as the Imrei Emes (1866–1948), was one of the leading chasidic Rebbes in Poland.]]
The Rashab argued that there was no need for secular education for community rabbis. Rabbi Grodzinski said a modicum of knowledge of Russian would be acceptable. The crown rabbis and their Enlightenment supporters argued that secular education was essential. Rav Grodzinski’s compromise was supported by the majority.[[104: In the wake of the meeting, the Rashab with the help of the Rayatz decided to lobby government authorities in St. Petersburg to advance their more conservative position. With the outbreak of war and the eventual revolution, however, those efforts became moot.]] The conference concluded with a meeting between the leading rabbis and Prime Minister Pyotr Stolypin.[[105: The prime minister treated the rabbis disrespectfully. First, they were forced to wait in a room with no seats for over two hours. During the meeting itself, Stolypin blamed the rabbis for the uprising of the Bund (the secular Jewish socialist party) against the government. He did not respond to their requests for legislation to improve the condition of Jews in Russia. There were nine participants in the meeting, including the Rashab, Rabbi Chaim Ozer, Rabbi Chaim Soloveitchik, Baron David Gunzburg (the conference chair), and Eliezer Polyakov. The Rayatz was not at this meeting. For a detailed review of the meeting including news reports, see Rabbi Dovid Kamenetsky, Rabbeinu Chaim Ozer: Rabban Shel Kol B’nei Yisrael ( Jerusalem: 5781), chap. 15.]] But the plans were never actualized – first because the government wavered on implementing the proposals, and then because of the revolution that brought the czarist regime to an end.
Russia’s political turmoil in the first part of the twentieth century, culminating in the Russian Revolution of 1917, was imbued with anti-Semitism. As historian Eli Rubin writes, the government blamed the Jews for all their failings. “The ills of Russia were the result of the Jewish-led efforts to erode Russian nationalism, never the result of government corruption and incompetence.” In 1913, this rose to a new level with the infamous Beilis affair.
Mendel Beilis,[[106: Mendel Beilis was born in 1874 and died in 1934.]] a Kiev Jew, was accused of killing twelve-year-old Andrei Yushchinksy after the boy’s body was discovered in a cave near the brick factory in Kiev that Beilis managed. It was a typical blood libel – prosecutors resurrected the myth of ritual murder, accusing Beilis of killing the boy to use his blood in the Passover matzahs. Government leaders sent investigators to bolster the prosecution, hoping the trial would weaken the liberal parties in the upcoming elections.[[107: Marina Kigel, “The People of Kiev Made Him a Target and Imposed the Suffering on All Jews: The Beilis Case – The Last Blood Libel,” available at: https://www.anumuseum.org.il/blog/beilis/.]] Their claim, according to Russian nationalist Professor Vasily Chernov, was that it was not all Jews who practiced this sort of ritual, but specifically Chasidim, “a barbarous fanatic sect that engages in ritual murder.” Beilis, while not fully observant, came from a chasidic background, and prosecutors tried to link him and the alleged murder to the Chabad community because of his friendship with a man by the name of Feivel Schneersohn, who was born in Lubavitch. Rubin says, “This was the only link to the Rebbes of Lubavitch, but though he shared the same last name, he was not a known relative.”[[108: Eli Rubin, “The Tsar’s Scapegoats: Beilis, the Chassidim and the Jews,” available at: chabad.org/2335459.]]
The Beilis trial was a threat to all Jews in Russia and the chasidic community in particular. The Rashab dispatched the Rayatz to enlist Oscar Gruzenberg, one of Russia’s leading attorneys, to spearhead the defense. Gruzenberg came from a traditional family but was not personally observant. The Rayatz brought a letter from the Rashab to Gruzenberg, urging him to defend Beilis. “It is your destiny to represent all Jews around the world and to remove these terrible accusations from over our heads,” wrote the Rashab. After presenting the letter, the Rayatz told Gruzenberg about “the despair among Jewish brethren in Russia,” explaining the “poisonous agitation” against the community at large.
“News of your acceptance of the defense would restore their confidence,” he said. His plea was answered; after thirty minutes of deliberation, Gruzenberg agreed.
The trial sparked interest the world over. Jewish communities across the globe protested the outrageous accusations. Hundreds of reporters attended. If the prosecution could prove that ritual murder had a place in Jewish tradition, it would set the stage for a guilty verdict for Beilis. The prosecutors tried to link Beilis to the Chabad community, attempting to put the teachings of Chasidism on trial. The Rashab and the Rayatz played a major behind-the-scenes role in fighting the accusations, and they were involved in trial preparations. The Rashab considered testifying but decided against it, citing a few reasons, including that it “would draw much attention and might strengthen the other side.”[[109: The Rashab was also concerned that he might have to elucidate obtuse theological concepts in “modern terms.” See Igrot Kodesh, vol. 16, letter to Shmuel Treinin dated 17 Elul, 5763 (September 19, 1913).]]
Describing the trial’s conclusion, the Rayatz wrote, “The last public hearing in the trial of Beilis was held in one of the greatest halls of Kiev in the presence of thousands of men and women and members of the highest spheres of government.” Gruzenberg orchestrated a masterful defense with the testimony of Moscow’s Chief Rabbi Jacob Mazeh in a nine-hour presentation, demolishing the prosecution’s case. Much of his closing argument was spent explaining the teachings of Chasidism, particularly Chabad Chasidism.[[110: “In Defense of Chassidism,” available at: chabad.org/2363483.]] Gruzenberg concluded his closing arguments with a plea: “The G-d of Israel demands justice and righteousness. I, Oscar Gruzenberg, am a Jew, and from the bottom of my aching heart for the fate of the Torah and our brethren, I call upon you, this court, to look through the window of truth which the members of the defense have opened in the wall of deceit.” As he finished, Gruzenberg followed the instructions of the Rashab and called out, “Mendel Beilis is innocent of this blood libel! Shema Yisrael Adonai Eloheinu Adonai Echad – Hear O Israel, G-d our G-d, G-d is One!”[[111: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 13, letter to the arrangements committee for the memorial for attorney Oscar Gruzenberg, dated December 12, 1942 (7 Tevet, 5003). The English translation of the letter is available in the Mindel Archives.]]
The Rayatz’s energetic and far-reaching public activities, his watchful defense of the rights of Russian Jewry, and his constant fight against the local and central authorities aroused the displeasure of the czarist regime. Between 1911 and 1916, the Rayatz was arrested on four occasions. The first time was a result of accusations by leaders of the Enlightenment school in Lubavitch. The next incident was in December 1906, when the Rebbe was investigated due to riots in Lubavitch by radical youth, who he proved were not part of the yeshivah.[[112: This arrest took place after the 1905 revolution, when political tensions were high.]] In 1910 and again in 1916, he was imprisoned in St. Petersburg because of his efforts to exempt young men from military service. All of these detentions were brief, since government inquiries found nothing incriminating in his behavior. He was released each time with a stern warning. These incidents did not deter the Rayatz from continuing his work – on the contrary, they spurred him to even greater efforts.
In 1917 and 1918, the Rayatz again took a leading part in the assembly of rabbis and laymen in Moscow and Kharkiv.[[113: Rabbi Nissan Mindel, Biography of Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn.]] For a quarter of a century, until his father’s passing in 1920, the Rayatz took center stage in Jewish life. There was hardly a major concern among Russian Jewry in which the Rashab was not involved, and as his father’s private secretary, the Rayatz dealt with many of these issues on a day-to-day basis. He battled anti-Semitism in czarist Russia and lobbied foreign governments and bankers to pressure Russia to curb its oppression of the Jews. He attended many key meetings of prominent rabbinic leaders, both on his own and at his father’s side. From a young age, he became closely acquainted with Europe’s most prominent rabbis. He worked side by side with many of the distinguished Chabad Chasidim who played leadership roles in Russian Jewry. He nurtured the yeshivah in Lubavitch from a small core of students to one of Europe’s most respected centers of Jewish learning. All of this would prepare him for the challenges he faced in the years after his father’s passing.
In 1914, the winds of war began to blow through Europe, ignited by the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria. Germany declared war on Russia that summer and invaded the following year. The Rashab was alarmed by the German onslaught and told the Chasidim on Simchat Torah in 1915, “I know the kaiser well from the thirty years that I have been traveling outside Russia. He is an apikores (heretic), and under his rule I cannot dwell.”
The Rayatz recalled the time that he and the Rashab had attended a public speech of Kaiser Wilhelm in Berlin. “We saw from afar that the kaiser was staring at us with a sharp look. He tilted his head to the crown prince beside him, whispered something in his ear, and the prince smirked slightly. A few moments later, police detectives approached us and ordered us to leave. My father said to me, ‘Do you remember when we were in Berlin and saw Wilhelm speak, his face as white as plaster? Already then, all the plans of this war were arrayed in his mind and thoughts.’”[[114: Sefer HaSichos, 5680; Eli Rubin, “Purim in Petrograd, 1917,” available at: chabad.org/3605206.]]
The Rashab was alarmed by reports that the Russian government was seizing Jewish leaders near the front lines and accusing them of spying. With the Germans creeping closer, the Rashab deliberated and then made the decision to abandon Lubavitch, hoping to return at the end of the conflict. For 102 years, four Chabad Rebbes had called Lubavitch home, making it a hub for Russian Jews. Chasidim and Jews of all backgrounds flocked there to celebrate the holidays, to bask in the light of the Rebbes, and to absorb the profound teachings of the Torah. Since the founding of the yeshivah there in 1897, it had also become a center of academic excellence. Now, in late October 1915,[[115: They departed on 16 Cheshvan, 5676 (Sunday, October 24, 1915).]] the sun set on Lubavitch when the Rashab, his son, and their families departed. The yeshivah lingered there for another two years before following suit.
The Rashab hoped the move would be temporary. As he left, he told the Chasidim, “We hope to return. With Hashem’s help, we will be back before Passover.”[[116: Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, chap. 11.]] The historic Chabad library was packed into thirty-five crates and placed in storage in Moscow,[[117: The library was stored in the warehouse of one of the Chasidim, Zelkin Persitz, and later seized and transferred to the Russian National Library. Despite major efforts by Chabad to repatriate the collection, it remains there until today. The manuscripts, including the priceless siddur of Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov, were saved and eventually brought to the United States by the Rayatz.]] and the Rashab took with him the collection of valuable manuscripts.
They made their way far from the invading Germans to the city of Rostov-on-Don, seven hundred miles south of Moscow. Some of the yeshivah students in Lubavitch hailed from Rostov, creating a strong connection between the communities. The Jewish leaders there offered the Rashab a safe haven.[[118: Rabbi Elyashiv Kaploun, Rostov-on-Don (Israel: Chish Publishing), chap. 9.]]
Rostov was outside the Pale of Settlement. Its community was founded by Jewish Cantonist soldiers who, after being drafted as children and serving twenty-five years in the Russian army, were permitted to reside anywhere in Russia. It was augmented by Jewish businessmen who had received permission to live in the city. Following the Communist Revolution, when Jews were granted the freedom to live anywhere in Russia, Rostov’s Jewish population grew. By 1915, the number neared fifteen thousand, and the city boasted synagogues, schools, and mutual aid societies.
The capital of Chabad was reestablished in Rostov. The Rashab spent the last five years of his life there, purchasing a large building to serve as his family residence, the community synagogue, mikveh, and eventually, the new location for the yeshivah. Despite the tumultuous, conflict-filled time, Chasidim still made their way to Rostov to visit the Rashab.[[119: Following the fall of the Soviet Union, Chabad returned to Rostov, reclaimed the building owned by the Rashab, and refurbished the Ohel at his grave. Today there is a flourishing community with a synagogue, school, and community programs; see https://www.jewishrostov.com/.]]
But the turmoil in Russia intensified. After the German invasion came the Bolshevik Revolution, followed by a civil war in which the Communists emerged victorious and slowly consolidated their control over the country. This raised the alarm in Beit HaRav, the Rebbe’s household. As Zalman Havlin,[[120: Letter from Zalman Havlin to Dovid Shifrin dated 19 Adar, 5684 (March 7, 1923) as published in Havlin, HaMashpia, 89.]] a member of the Rebbe’s inner circle, wrote, “The idea of relocating out of Russia entirely was raised.” That suggestion faded in January 1920, after the Bolsheviks took control of the city.
Not wanting to draw the attention of the new regime, the Rashab decided to curtail his public activities. He told Havlin, “Please ask anash[[121: A term used to refer to fellow Chabad Chasidim.]] in my name to limit visiting me for services, maamarim, or yechidut. Only if it’s a pressing issue should they come, but they should use discretion.” From then on, only a small group of Chasidim joined the Rashab for services and maamarim.
In late February of 1920,[[122: The meeting took place on Friday, February 27, 1920 (8 Adar, 5780). While on a mission to Moscow, he was harassed by the Yevesektzia. In a diary entry dated 10 Adar Alef, 5787 (February 12, 1927), he writes that he woke up at 3 a.m. feeling troubled by events in Moscow. After reflecting on this meeting with his father, “I went back to sleep, and my soul was relaxed.” Sefer HaSichos, 5680–87 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1992), 132; Likkutei Dibburim, vol. 6, chap. 63.]] with Purim approaching, the Rashab summoned his son to discuss what he believed would be a stormy future for the Jews in Russia. The Rayatz was not aware of the meeting’s agenda, nor of the fact that it would set the course of his life for decades to come.
When the Rayatz entered his father’s study on the second floor of the residence in Rostov, he was struck by an “awesome sight.” The study was illuminated by candles, casting an eerie light across the room. His father was “sitting with a Pri Etz Chaim [a classic work of Kabbalah] open on his desk.” He had been studying the section explaining the mystical meaning behind the story of Mordechai and Esther, the heroes of the Purim saga. “I recall that Friday when the Rebbe [Rashab] spoke terrifying words to me,” the Rayatz later wrote. His father’s facial expression became very grave as he told his son that the Jewish people were entering into a period of “dark clouds that will last at least twenty-two years.”[[123: The Rashab stated “at least twenty-two years,” implying that it could be longer. Indeed, the Soviet Union lasted seventy years, disintegrating in 1990. Perhaps the fact that the Rayatz heard this prediction from his father about the end of Communist Russia spurred him on to confront the Communists, knowing that their regime would end and Jewish life would be restored.]] The Rashab understood that Communist rule would begin an oppressive period for the Jews. Still, he said, the regime would not last forever, forecasting the eventual disintegration of the Soviet Union. “A country that persecutes Judaism will eventually fall,” he said, citing the words of the first Chabad Rebbe, Rabbi Schneur Zalman. The last czar, Nicholas,[[124: Nicholas II (1849–1917), the last czar of Russia, incited pogroms against the Jews. The Beilis blood libel trial also took place during his reign.]] “persecuted the Jews and Torah study, and in the end, there was a revolution and he was overthrown.”
It would take seventy years before Soviet Russia collapsed. Still, says Russian Jewish historian Nissan Rupo, “After twenty-two years, the Russian government curbed its active persecution of religion.” During World War II, in the early 1940s, the Russian Orthodox Church was permitted to operate publicly again. Also, says Rupo, “In 1942, a Lubavitch yeshivah opened in Samarkand.”
The Rashab predicted to his son that the Communist Jews who had formed the Yevesektzia, the anti-religious Jewish section of the Communist Party, would be the greatest threat to their fellow Jews. But he also foresaw their eventual fate. “The Jewish group that combats Judaism will be broken and their leaders killed. In the meanwhile, we will suffer from their evil actions and denunciations.” Their downfall began in 1930, when Stalin dismantled the Yevesektzia, killing and exiling many of its leaders and activists.[[125: Nora Levin writes, “A whole generation of Jewish Communists involved in Jewish affairs were liquidated in massive purges.” Professor Nora Levin, The Jews of the Soviet Union Since 1917 (New York University Press), chap. 14.]]
The Rashab also foretold[[126: The Rayatz recalls the 1920 meeting in his diary from February 1926; it may have also been recorded at an earlier date, but we do not have diaries from 1920. By 1926, Lenin had already died, Trotsky had not yet been exiled, and Stalin was consolidating power. It is remarkable to note the accuracy of these predictions, as well as those about the downfall of the Yevesektzia in the 1930s and the eventual collapse of the Soviet Union.]] the fate of prominent Communist leaders. “Lenin will die in a strange fashion. Trotsky will be exiled, and they will execute him. Stalin will follow the spirit of the time as needed, and he will be adorned with epaulets.” Three and half years later, in January 1924, Lenin died at the age of fifty-three after repeated strokes and medical complications.[[127: Gina Kolata, “Lenin’s Stroke: Doctor Has a Theory (and a Suspect),” available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/08/health/research/lenins-death-remains-a-mystery-for-doctors.html.]] In 1928, Trotsky was banished to remote Alma Alta and deported from Russia two years later. After living in European cities, he relocated to Mexico. In 1937, he was sentenced to death in absentia in a Moscow trial and assassinated by a Stalinist agent in his home in Mexico City in 1940.
As Lenin’s health deteriorated, Stalin consolidated power. He adapted his leadership to the times, presenting himself as a father to his people. He built Soviet industry and galvanized the public to fight the German invasion, using brutality without hesitation to advance his agenda.[[128: Stalin died on March 5, 1953, five days after Purim. At the Purim farbrengen that year, the seventh Rebbe alluded to the death of the czar; when the news of Stalin’s stroke and passing emerged, Chasidim claimed there was a connection to the Rebbe’s remarks.]] During the war years, Stalin wore a military uniform adorned by epaulets. At the Yalta conference with Roosevelt and Churchill, and later in Potsdam with Truman and Churchill, Stalin wore a uniform decorated with his rank of marshal.[[129: In June 1945, the Supreme Soviet elevated Stalin to the highest military rank, generalissimo, but he rejected the new uniform and continued to refer to himself as a marshal, wearing that uniform. See https://www.rbth.com/arts/2014/08/21/stalins_distinctive_military_wardrobe_37711.]] Stalin biographer Simon Montefiore says Stalin’s military attire “was a deliberate strategy to cultivate the image of authority and dominance.”[[130: Simon Sebag Montefiore, Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar.]]
That night in 1920, the Rashab entrusted his son with the sacred mission of combatting the Communists’ plan to extinguish religious life in Russia. He commanded him, “Yosef Yitzchak, for the sake of strengthening Torah, reverence of Heaven, and support for Judaism, you will have to act with actual mesirat nefesh (self-sacrifice), risking your life.”
Hearing these terrifying words, the Rayatz began to cry. His father consoled him. “Why are you crying? Once the month of Adar begins, we increase joy!” Then he added, “When it becomes difficult, remember my instructions to you that you must be willing to sacrifice your life to spread Torah, reverence of Heaven, and support for Judaism.” The risks to the Rayatz’s life would not be theoretical but real threats. Ultimately, said the Rashab, he would be successful, and the Soviet regime would collapse.
The Rayatz did not imagine that in just a few weeks, his father’s passing would thrust him into a position of leadership.
Seven years later, on a trip to Moscow while being pursued by the Yevesektzia, the Rayatz reflected in his diary on the trials that had transpired so far for Jews who remained loyal to Torah. “I was shaken when I heard my father’s words that we would suffer for at least twenty-two years. A tremor passes through my body over what can happen in the next fifteen years, and I cry bitter tears.” Nevertheless, he writes, the words of his father endowed him with the fortitude and inspiration to soldier on in the darkest times. “Whenever something happens that causes me to feel disheartened, I envision the sacred and alarming words of my father, the Rebbe, about the new regime and the fate of its three leaders that were said to me three weeks before his passing.”
The holiday of Purim had always been very joyous in Lubavitch. Distinguished Chasidim were invited to the traditional Purim dinner at the Rashab’s home, and the rest of the community would crowd around the table. As Rabbi Moshe Dovber (Berel) Rivkin recalled,[[131: Moshe Dovber Rivkin (1891–1976) was born in Zintsi, Ukraine, where his father, Reb Bentzion, was a renowned scholar and the town’s rabbi. Moshe Dovber was a child prodigy who began studying Talmud at age five. In his early years, he learned in Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim in Lubavitch. He became a senior yeshivah student who was intimately involved in Beit HaRav, the Rashab’s household, and bore witness to the last period of the Rashab’s life and the beginning of the leadership of the Rayatz. At the time, he wrote a personal account of the period titled Ashkavta DeRebbe, though he only published the first edition in 1963. It is a remarkable personal historical memoir filled with great detail and scholarly notations. While yet unmarried, Rabbi Rivkin was invited to become rosh yeshivah of Tomchei Temimim in Russia. He immigrated to Palestine, where he was appointed rosh yeshivah of Toras Emes in Jerusalem. He was invited to join the faculty of Yeshivah Torah Vodaath in Brooklyn in 1928, where he remained until his passing in 1976. See Rabbi Moshe Dovber Rivkin, Ashkavta DeRebbe (Brooklyn, NY: 1976), available at hebrewbooks.org.]] “Almost all anash and the students would join them. The Rashab would teach a maamar and share words of Torah.”[[132: Rivkin writes that the Rashab celebrated Shabbat and holidays privately with his family. “Three times a year, on Simchat Torah, 19 Kislev [celebrating the liberation of the Alter Rebbe from prison], and Purim, he would eat a public meal. These special events were very joyous; the Rashab was always in an uplifted mood.]]
The holiday celebrations of 1920 in Rostov were held under very different conditions. With a government ban on meetings and a curfew set at nine p.m., it was decided that the celebration should be more subdued.
“We all gathered at the Rashab’s home,” Zalman Havlin says, “and at first they told us the celebration would be brief, just for a few hours.” The Rebbe’s wife had notified the Chasidim that the celebration would go only until curfew, after which they would disperse, unlike in Lubavitch, where the farbrengen lasted through the night.
The Chasidim listened as the Rashab shared teachings and interspersed his remarks with joyous melodies. Rivkin recalls that the rebbetzin and the Rayatz asked them to keep their voices down. The Rashab, however, encouraged the singing, saying, “On Simchat Torah we danced and sang” – before the Bolsheviks took over the city – “and now we will also. And if it’s a [divine] test, we will persevere.” The Rashab took out some money and sent someone to purchase additional liquor. This only increased the Rayatz’s alarm that the large, lively crowd might attract the attention of the police. Noticing his son’s concern, the Rashab reassured him, “Yosef Yitzchak, don’t worry. We’re going to be completely fine.”
The celebration continued through the night, only becoming more boisterous. It caused some in the crowd to become “fearful,” as Havlin puts it. The Rebbe was in an upbeat mood, and no one had the audacity to leave, despite the danger. “His face was radiant, almost unworldly. He taught Chasidut, and it was unlike any experience we ever had with him,” remembers Havlin.
Everyone’s fears were realized when three Bolshevik police officers arrived. “They wanted to inspect the house,” says Havlin. “The Chasidim told them that the Rashab was occupied with people and could not see them, and they should return in a few hours.” To everyone’s surprise and relief, they departed.
A few hours later, they came back. This time, they pushed their way toward the room where the celebration was underway. “The table was full of bottles of mashkeh (liquor), and there were plates full of money that had been donated.” The Chasidim wanted to hide the bottles and money, but the Rashab instructed them not to move anything. “I have no fear of them,” he exclaimed.
The officers entered the room and stood opposite the Rashab. “He turned his face to the Chasidim” as if the officers were not there. “We have to say chasidut, and they will be batul (nullified, as if they don’t exist).” The Rashab began saying a maamar[[133: Rabbi Shalom Dovber Schneersohn, Sefer Maamarim, “Reishit Goyim Amalek,” Purim 5680 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1989).]] that explored the concept of evil being a false reality, with the true essence of all creation being godly and holy. “The police stood there for a long time, gazing intently at the Rashab, and then left without saying a word.”
The farbrengen lasted twelve hours, until the morning light. Afterward, the Rashab retired to his private study. Yaakov Landau,[[134: Yaakov Landau (1893–1986) later became the chief rabbi of Bnei Brak. Havlin, HaMashpia; Rivkin, Ashkavta DeRebbe.]] a student and the Rashab’s personal assistant, followed him and remarked, “Tonight was a time of great joy. We sat the whole night with the Rebbe and heard profound teachings of Chasidut that we never anticipated. Next year we should celebrate [the chasidic holiday of] 19 Kislev in Lubavitch.”
The Rashab sat stoically and did not reply. Landau repeated the statement, and still the Rashab was silent. The Rashab walked into his bedroom. Surprised by the lack of response, Landau trailed behind him and repeated the statement for the third time. The Rashab turned to him and said, “G-d should help that we should be close spiritually.”
Landau was confused and troubled by these words, and he shared the incident with Zalman Havlin. “Who could have imagined that two weeks later, the Rashab would no longer be with us,” he later reflected.
In the coming days, Havlin saw that the Rashab was very preoccupied. He spent the week secluded his study, composing a document. Later, the Rayatz told Havlin, “I went into his office and he covered the papers with a kerchief. Now I understand that it was his will.” Havlin says that “the whole week he was preparing himself in an orderly way.” In retrospect, “it was astonishing.”
On Friday, the Rashab began to feel unwell. “His temperature rose over Shabbat, and on Sunday the doctor diagnosed him with typhoid.” As the week progressed, his condition deteriorated. “All the students and Chasidim recited psalms day and night [in the merit of his recovery].”
The following Shabbat afternoon, a week after the onset of the illness, the situation turned bleak. The Rashab asked to be moved into his study. As they carried him in, he remarked, “I am going to heaven, and I am leaving you my manuscripts.” He then added, “Take me in one and we will be together,” insinuating that when the Chasidim studied his teachings, they would be united with him.
These shocking words frightened the Rayatz. The Rashab, seeing the fear in his son’s face, exclaimed, “Hitpaalut? Hitpaalut? Mochin, mochin – Excitement? Excitement? Intellect, intellect.” He was referring to the chasidic teaching that one’s intellect should control his emotions.
Rivkin writes that this was a transformational moment for the Rayatz. “From that point on, he was different. He never had the natural expression of becoming anxious.” In the years to come, “he approached everything with gadlut hamochin (guided by his intellect).” Later, even when the Rayatz was arrested and investigated, he never allowed himself to be intimidated, always maintaining control even when being threatened with bodily harm or death.
As darkness set in and Shabbat ended, the mood became foreboding. The Chasidim gathered and continued praying, fearing the worst. The Rayatz stepped into the hallway outside the room where the Rashab lay. “He was deep in thought. He recited psalms, cried intensely, and then quietly sang the [Four Stanzas] chasidic melody of the Alter Rebbe [reserved for special occasions],” says Rivkin.
Close to three a.m., the Rashab gazed at his son, attempted to lift his hands, and moved his lips. Rivkin says, “The Rayatz realized that his father wanted to bless him and asked all to leave the room, leaving just him and his family.” Later, the Rayatz and his daughters told Rivkin that the Rashab had blessed each of them. “First the eldest, Chana. The Rashab gazed at her, raising his hands over her head, and they heard [him say] the [priestly] blessing of Yevarekhekha. Then the middle one, Mushka, and the youngest, Shaindel. He then placed his two hands on the Rayatz” and gave him a blessing.
Late that night, the Rayatz left the room again for a moment, and in the hallway, he blurted out to Rivkin in a loud voice, “Gevald (woe), Berel!” He cried profusely and then asked, “Berel, what do you say?” Grasping for words, Rivkin finally uttered, “G-d Himself can help.”
The Rashab continued to weaken. His heart fluttering, the Rayatz called out, “Tatte, Tatte! – Father, Father!” The Rashab gazed silently at him. “As they heard these words, the hearts of the Chasidim broke,” recalls Rivkin.
At 4:00 a.m., the Rashab’s breathing became weaker. His son exclaimed again, “Tatte, Tatte!” The Rashab turned to him and smiled. An hour later, they realized that his passing was imminent. Havlin recalls, “We were all standing around him in trepidation as the morning light peeked in, wondering what would become of us [without the Rebbe].” Again, the Rayatz cried, “Tatte, Tatte!”
“This time, the Rashab opened his eyes and we saw tears.” Then they heard the Rashab whispering. It was difficult to decipher what he was saying, but they soon realized that he was reciting the words “bekhol levavkha uvekhol nafshekha – with all your heart and all your soul” of the Shema prayer. Then suddenly, “he turned to look at us and his soul ascended to heaven.”[[135: Ibid.]]



