It was May 1945. The war had finally ended in Europe, and the Japanese would surrender four months later. Word of the magnitude of the tragedy that had befallen Europe’s Jews was beginning to cross the ocean as people discovered the scope of the Nazis’ final solution. In his office, the Rebbe sat gazing at pictures of his Chasidim whose lives had been snuffed out by the Nazis. They included some of his most devoted followers, Rabbis Yechezkel “Chatche” Feigin, Yitzchak “Itche der Masmid” Horowitz, and others. Uncontrollable tears flowed from the Rebbe’s eyes as he looked at their faces. And these were just the people whose deaths were known – the fate of his daughter Sheina and her husband was still a mystery. Alarmed at her father’s heartbroken weeping, the Rebbe’s daughter called Rabbi Shmuel Levitin. He tried to console the Rebbe, but his efforts proved fruitless. Then Rabbi Moshe Chaim Yehoshua Schneersohn-Twerski[[1: Rabbi Moshe Chaim Yehoshua Schneersohn-Twerski (1867–1957) was a descendant of the second Rebbe, Rabbi Dovber. He immigrated to the United States in 1924 and lived on Eastern Parkway near the Rebbe’s shul.]] was summoned. A distant relative and a close confidant of the Rebbe, as well as a naturally upbeat, joyous person, he was finally able to lift the Rebbe’s mood.
The postwar ushered in a whole new series of challenges for the Rebbe. Around the globe, survivors and refugees were looking to restart their lives. Their families and communities were in shatters. Poland, the prewar heart of European Jewish life, was now a graveyard, Jewish homes and businesses seized by the Poles. When Jews returned to reclaim their property, the Poles lashed out with brutality. A year after the war, a group of Poles killed forty-two Jews in a vicious pogrom in Kielce. The message was clear: Jews were not welcome back. Refugees began searching for a haven in other European countries, the United States, Canada, South America, and even far-off Australia. The Statue of Liberty beckoned many, while others were lured by the hope of Jewish independence in Israel.
Since the Rebbe had disembarked on American shores in 1940, he had successfully created a beachhead of traditional Judaism in the US. Now, in the aftermath of the war, as refugees started to reimagine their lives, the Rebbe broadened his scope, believing the refugees could create Jewish revitalization on a global level. His Chasidim scattered throughout the DP camps in Europe, and the students in his yeshivas in Shanghai, the US, Canada, and Israel became the Rebbe’s foot soldiers to realize his vision. This infused the survivors with a new sense of purpose. The Rebbe wanted them to see the reestablishment of their lives as not just a new personal start, but as part of the mission to create a global Jewish renaissance.
The refugee yeshivah students who had spent the war years in Shanghai finally made it to the US in 1946. They had fled Poland to Lithuania at the onset of the war, and from there made the long trek through Russia and Japan, forcibly relocated to Shanghai. There they had faced isolation, starvation, and other hardships. At the war’s end they learned that almost all their relatives had perished in the Holocaust. Now, after a year of waiting for visas, they were finally arriving on American shores.
In a poignant letter,[[2: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 9, letter to “My dear beloved students from Poland,” sent upon their arrival in the US from Shanghai, dated 15 Av, 5706 (August 12, 1946).]] the Rebbe empowered the students and laid out a new vision, explaining that the purpose of every soul is to infuse the world with sanctity “by the striving of man to serve G-d.” He charged them with the goal of bolstering Jewish life, telling them that their long odyssey from Poland, China and now the US was part of a larger plan. “The reason that divine providence has brought you here is to warm up the tepid America with reverence of Heaven and chasidic passion. Proceed on the mission, with graciousness and warmth – as the famous saying goes, look for the positive qualities in others and the deficiencies in yourself.” He warned them to stay focused and not be overwhelmed by the bounty of America: “Don’t get sidetracked by the nonessential.” The Rebbe summed up his goals in a letter to Rabbi Yosef Wineberg, who was helping refugees with relocation. There should be “in every community and in every country, a student of Tomchei Temimim, a beacon of the Torah light in the ways of Chasidism.”[[3: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 10, letter dated 7 Shevat, 5700 ( January 25, 1950).]]
This strategy had been percolating for a few years. In 1941, students from Poland’s Telz Yeshiva[[4: Telz was one of the outstanding centers of Jewish scholarship in Poland. For a history of the yeshivah, see Shmuel Natanowitz, “The Telshe Yeshivah – Its Rabbis and Its Institutions,” available at: https://www.jewishgen.org/yizkor/Telsiai/tel057.html.]] who had British passports, including twenty-year-old Chaim Gutnick,[[5: Rabbi Chaim Gutnick (1921–2003) was born in Ukraine and raised in London, where his father was the rabbi of the Chabad synagogue. Gutnick would emerge as one of the most influential rabbis in Australia. He founded the Rabbinical Council of Australia and Elwood Talmud Torah Hebrew Congregation. His children and grandchildren have continued his legacy and are leading rabbis in the country. For more on the Gutnick family, see “Memento from the Wedding of Yaakov and Chaya Basya Gurkov,” available at: https://collive.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Master-GUTNIK-26-Av-5779-ENGLISH.pdf.]] fled east.[[6: The students had received visas from the Japanese consul in Kovno, Chiune Sugihara. They were led by Rabbi Chaim Stein, who settled in Cleveland. See Hana Levi Julian, “Telshe Y. Rabbi Chaim Stein, 98,” available at: https://www.israelnationalnews.com/news/145319.]] It was a long and hazardous journey by train through Russia and Japan, and then by ship to Brisbane, Australia, where the Commonwealth County provided safety. Australia had many synagogues, almost all of them Orthodox, stately places for Shabbat services where rabbis wore top hats and dared not challenge the weakening religiosity of their members. Australia had no yeshivas or day schools. Local Jewish leaders were anxious that an influx of young idealistic yeshivah students could challenge the communal status quo. Their solution was to sponsor their tickets to the United States. Faculty members[[7: Rabbis Mordechai Katz and Eliyahu Meir Bloch, rosheiyeshivah of Telz, traveled to the US in 1940 to explore options for relocating the yeshivah. They chose Cleveland and reopened Telz there in October 1941. The group of ten students who came via Australia were the nucleus for the rebirth of Telz on American soil.]] of the Telz Yeshivah who had already found refuge in the US secured their visas. The students gratefully accepted the offer to have their travel expenses covered and joined the reconstituted Telz Yeshivah in Cleveland, Ohio.
Gutnick was the only Chabad follower of the group.[[8: His father, Rabbi Schneur Gutnick, passed away in London in 1931 when he was just eleven. Rabbi Yechezkel Abramsky took an interest in the orphan and encouraged his attendance at Telz. He joined after his mother received a blessing from the Rebbe for him to join the yeshivah.]] He wrote to the Rebbe in Brooklyn, asking him to arrange his admission to the US. But the Rebbe instructed him to remain in Australia, charging him with a mission to prepare for refugees who would come after the war. “Man’s steps are ordained by G-d, and since Providence has guided you to Australia, this is your place,” the Rebbe told him. “Prepare the ground for the arrival of Jewish refugees so that it will be a place of Torah, where G-d can be found.”[[9: Author’s interview with Chaim Gutnick.]] It was early 1941, and Germany reigned supreme in most of Europe. The US would not enter the war until the attack on Pearl Harbor in December. It was a dark time, an Allied victory was uncertain, and the idea of Jewish refugees immigrating to Australia at the war’s end seemed improbable. “This was the vision of a true Jewish leader,” Gutnick said years later.[[10: Ibid. For an amazing story about Rabbi Gutnick and the seventh Rebbe, see “Video of Rabbi Chaim Gutnick Z”L in 2000,” available at: https://elirab.me/video-of-rabbi-chaim-gutnick-zl-in-2000/.]]
The Chabad refugees came in two waves: The first to come were those who had survived the war in Europe, Shanghai, and other locations and were looking to restart their lives; afterwards came some one thousand Chasidim who made an incredible escape from Russia in late 1946 and 1947. Most of the first group had lived through the Holocaust. Some survived death camps; others were hidden from the Nazis in Europe or had found a haven in other countries. The second group consisted of Chasidim who had withstood almost three decades of anti-religious oppression in the Soviet Union and who had educated their children in underground yeshivas. Many were imprisoned in Siberia for their Jewish devotion, and some had family members who had never returned from that ordeal. These two groups, known as the “Poilisher” and the “Rusisher,” the Poles and the Russians, would be the Rebbe’s vanguard. The Polish students of Tomchei Temimim who had been in China brought with them a youthful vigor.[[11: After the war, the students of Mir were instrumental in the rebirth of the yeshivah, both in New York and Israel. The influence of the Mirrer students was felt in many parts of the American Orthodox community. Rabbi Dr. Aaron Rakeffet recalls that the Shanghai students of the Mir Yeshivah had a powerful impact on him as a young student at Yeshivah University. He recalls, “We had never seen real European yeshivah students in America, and they became role models” for his generation at YU. Aaron Rakeffet, From Washington Avenue to Washington Street (Gefen Publishing, 2011).]] The Russians who persevered under Communism served as powerful symbols of Jewish self-sacrifice to their counterparts educated in Western countries with little adversity. Both groups were role models of chasidic values and scholarship.
Until now, the pool of manpower available to the Rebbe had been limited. That changed with the arrival of the two sets of refugees – they built the foundations for a dramatic revolution in the last five years of the Rebbe’s life. They filled key leadership positions in the postwar era, and their children would fill the ranks of the seventh Rebbe’s army of emissaries, eventually transforming the landscape of Judaism across the world.
When the war began, many Russian Chasidim fled to remote Uzbekistan, two thousand miles from Moscow. Far from the invading Nazis, they clustered in Samarkand and Tashkent. Russia’s focus on repelling the German invasion and the remoteness of the province permitted a degree of religious freedom. The local community’s connection to Chabad reached back to the turn of the century, when the Rashab dispatched emissaries to inspire and educate. Clandestine yeshivas operated with little government intrusion, and Chasidim experienced a sense of freedom not felt in decades. But as the war ended, the harsh hand of Communism slowly began to reassert itself. At the same time, an avenue to freedom opened when Russia permitted Polish citizens and their families who had found a haven in Russia during the war to be repatriated back to their homeland.
With Polish passports, Chasidim could cross the border to freedom. Polish passports of refugees who had died or who desired to remain in the Soviet Union were available on the black market. The names were inscribed in ink, making it possible for a skilled forger to modify details. Azriel Chaikin, who was a teenager at the time, describes the confusion. “Some were trying to marry Poles. There were rumors you could buy papers.”[[12: Author’s interview with Azriel Chaikin.]] A few Chasidim dared to make the crossing. One of the first to go was Michoel Lipsker. “He was a man of action,” recalls Chaikin. “He took his family and left.” As word of the successful escapes of Lipsker and others filtered back to the Chasidim in Russia, they began to wonder if they too could cross the border to freedom.
There were many obstacles to overcome. Most of the Chasidim were living in faraway Uzbekistan, requiring them to travel over 2,500 miles west to the border town of Lvov. There, they would need housing, food, and documents as they waited for transports, at times for a few months. The sudden appearance in the city of large number of religious Jews could spark the interest of the authorities. They would have to stay under the radar – not easy for men sporting beards. They would have to acquire Polish passports on the black market and then forge the names of additional family members. Crossing the border posing as Poles without knowing any Polish would be very perilous. They would have to remember their new names and ensure that their children did not accidentally reveal their identities. Large amounts of money were also needed to cover travel, housing, and bribes. It was very risky. Success meant a life of freedom, but capture could bring possible death in Soviet prison.
The Chasidim in Russia did not want to undertake such a dangerous journey without the Rebbe’s accord, but communication from Uzbekistan to Brooklyn was almost impossible. A message intercepted by the Russian authorities could have dire consequences. Cryptic messages were relayed via third parties. In New York, Rabbi Shmuel Levitin informed the Rebbe that he had received a message from his son-in-law Binyamin Gorodetsky in Uzbekistan, asking in code if they should leave. The Rebbe responded that because the situation was still unclear, it would be best to wait.[[13: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 9, letter to Rabbi Shmuel Levitin dated 8 Tevet, 1946 (December 12, 1945). For a facsimile of the letter, see Rabbi Binyamin Gorodetsky, Light in the Darkness (New York: Sheingold Publishers, 1986), 91.]] The Rebbe’s exact words were too dangerous to relay, so Rabbi Levitin sent a telegram to Uzbekistan saying, “Grandfather says it’s better to stay put.”[[14: Rabbi Shalom Friedland, Pe’ilut Chotzei Gevulot (Kfar Chabad, Israel: Kehot Publication Society), chap. 3.]]
The situation continued to be fluid, with a few more Chasidim crossing the border successfully. An update was communicated to the Rebbe, who responded in code: “It is not good to be in a place with no shalom bayit (domestic peace). Better to be in a place of shalom bayit and to wait for another opportunity.” The Chasidim understood that the Rebbe was giving them the green light to escape, but not to remain in Poland, where rabid anti-Semitism made it unsafe.
At the time, Poland was under Russian control, and some Chasidim were unsure whether they could make their way to the West from there. But more Chasidim were successfully crossing the border, and that information was relayed to the Rebbe. Just before Passover, Gorodetsky received a letter from Levitin with the Rebbe’s approval (in code), provided there was the possibility of going from Poland to Germany to the DP camps under American control.[[15: Gorodetsky, Light in the Darkness, chap. 11.]]
Gorodetsky himself was already under police scrutiny in his hometown of Samarkand. Fearing arrest, he secretly decided to depart. At midnight, he and his family climbed out a window in the back of his apartment and headed to Tashkent, 170 miles away, by car.[[16: Gorodetsky, Light in the Darkness, chap. 12.]] He left in the nick of time, as just a few hours later, the secret police came looking for him. The Gorodetskys hid with relatives for Shabbat, and on Sunday the family headed to Moscow by train. Afraid of a long journey with multiple identity checks, Gorodetsky himself secured a seat on a flight to Moscow with the help of a black marketeer. From Moscow, they made their way to the border town of Lvov. People heading to Poland were loaded onto freight trains for the trip over the border that lasted through the night. Gorodetsky was questioned by officials who suspected that he was not Polish, but he managed to convince them otherwise. Finally, they arrived in Cracow. From there, he notified the Rebbe of the full details of the situation, and the Rebbe arranged a payment of two thousand dollars (thirty thousand dollars today) to smuggle the Gorodetsky family to Czechoslovakia. As Gorodetsky writes, the Rebbe “gave full consent for our people to leave Russia.” He updated the Chasidim in Russia about the Rebbe’s unequivocal approval, telling them that they could receive up to three thousand dollars per family for travel expenses, if needed.
News of the Rebbe’s approval and reports of the success of individual escapees spread amongst the Russian Chasidim. Some of the elders worried that if all the Chasidim departed, there would be no one left to direct the Jewish educational underground. In the end, single students were given a green light while others were told to make their own choice. Many decided to try, and from all over the country, Chasidim began streaming to Lvov, the departure point for transports to Poland.
In Samarkand, Tzemach Gurewicz applied for an exit permit for his family[[17: Permission was needed from Ovir, the division of the Ministry of Internal Affairs that issued exit visas.]] using doctored Polish passports. Tzemach’s daughter Yehudis recalls, “He escaped from prison during the war, so he was afraid that they were looking for him.” Once they received the permit, they kept it a secret, fearing informers who knew their true identities. “We could not trust our neighbors and sometimes even family.” Departing in the middle of the night, her mother took the children and just a few personal items stuffed into backpacks. “No one knew we were leaving. We climbed out of a back window and scrambled into a truck and boarded the train.”
In the meanwhile, Tzemach followed his daily routine, “acting like nothing was happening.” On board the train, Yehudis’s mother worried as it began to move and Tzemach had still not joined them. At the last moment, “he caught up to the train.” The 2,500-mile trip to the border took a few weeks, with stops in the forest to forage for food. As they got close to the border, they were instructed to keep quiet. “If we spoke Russian, we would be shot. We were given new names. Mine was Abramowitz.” The train picked up speed as it crossed the border. “Forty-three of us were standing in the cattle car.” Once in Poland, the mood changed: “My father was smiling.” From Poland, the family was smuggled to Czechoslovakia with the help of the Brichah,[[18: Brichah, Hebrew for “fleeing,” was an organized effort by Holocaust survivors in Europe and Zionist activists from Palestine. Their heroic activities saved many lives. Rebbetzin Chaya Mushka Schneerson called them “tzaddikim that did not put on tefillin.” Zvi Nesher describes the interaction of Brichah with Chabad: “The Bricha men were amazed by their ingenious escape from Russia and very impressed by the discipline, the sense of solidarity, and the reverence for their Rebbe in New York.” Ephraim Dekel, Briha: Flight to the Homeland (New York: Herzl Press), chap. 6.]] and then into Germany. “We walked and walked,” Yehudis remembers. Finally, they arrived in a German refugee camp.
As more and more Chasidim tried to secure passports to make the trip, concerned that the window of opportunity would soon close, the community decided to coordinate logistics in an organized fashion. A small Sanhedrin,[[19: Such a large convocation was unprecedented. Usually, rabbinical courts consist of three judges; at times, of five. The gravity of the situation and the risk of death demanded a serious deliberation based on Jewish law.]] a rabbinical court of twenty-three distinguished rabbis, convened secretly in Lvov to set guidelines for the project. All the Chasidim would pool their money and possessions into a central fund for the benefit of everyone. Professional counterfeiters would be engaged to modify and manufacture passports to be presented to Ovir, the government agency issuing exit permits. Money was designated for bribing officials. As large numbers of religious Jews in Lvov could draw the attention of the authorities, the bearded Chasidim were ordered to remain hidden in apartments. Young girls and women, who were less conspicuous, were tasked with the job of being messengers, moving money, documents, and people to hiding places. The most audacious escape in Soviet history was underway. It became known as “the Great Escape.” In total, one thousand Chasidim, men, women, and children, crossed the border in a series of transports via cattle cars that moved slowly between Lvov in Russia and Poland.[[20: For lists of those who succeeded in leaving Russia, see Friedland, Pe’ilut Chotzei Gevulot.]]
During the summer and fall of 1946, more and more families arrived illegally in Lvov, hiding out in apartments around the city. As they waited, tensions rose, as discovery would bring arrest and imprisonment. Most had disposed of all their possessions and were living in limbo, waiting for documents, exit permits, and the unpredictable announcements of train departures. Before the High Holidays in 1946, the Chasidim became aware that government officials had increased surveillance at the train station. For over a month, families sat in their apartments fearing for their lives, not even venturing out to attend Yom Kippur services. With tensions high and money and resources diminishing, a small group decided to make a run for it. To evade agents posted in the Lvov station, they boarded the train a few stops ahead of the city. The train passed through Lvov without incident, and they successfully crossed the border.
One of those who crossed the border was Rebbetzin Chana Schneerson, mother of the Ramash. She was placed in a German DP camp and finally made her way to Paris. Her husband was jailed and exiled in 1939 to a remote village in Kazakhstan near the Chinese border. She followed him and was at his bedside when he passed away in Alma Ata in 1945. In 1947 the Ramash traveled to France to be reunited with his mother after twenty years of separation. He remained in Paris for three months, arranging her US immigration and eventually escorting her to New York.
During his visit in Paris, he led a farbrengen marking Lag BaOmer.[[21: The gathering took place on May 18, 1947.]] The Ramash recounted what the Rebbe in New York was doing while a large group of Chasidim, including his mother, crossed the border between Russia and Poland on December 2, 1946.[[22: Yemei Melekh, vol. 3, chap. 5; Friedland, Pe’ilut Chotzei Gevulot. The story was also recounted by Efraim Zalman Sudakevitch, who was at the farbrengen in Paris. Numerous other attendees of the farbrengen have retold this story as well.]]
“That day, the Rebbe’s nurse, Manya, came to give the Rebbe his daily injections. She knocked on the Rebbe’s door and did not hear a response. Entering, she discovered the Rebbe sitting, not acknowledging her.” Alarmed, the nurse called for the Rebbe’s wife, who came running. Frightened when the Rebbe didn’t respond to her either, she summoned the Ramash. “I ran quickly and entered the Rebbe’s room. I drew close to the Rebbe and heard him saying the words of the prayer Az Yashir [sung by the Jews at the crossing of the Red Sea, Exodus 15]. I told everyone that everything is fine.” The Rebbe remained seated but motioned with his feet as if he were walking. When he finished reciting the prayer, he repeated it again. Suddenly, he exclaimed, “They got through, they got through.” Then the Rebbe began to respond to those around him. Shortly afterward, a telegram arrived from the group of escapees that read, “We have crossed the border and we are in Przemysl.”
The crossing had been frightening. The train was delayed at the border for two hours while the Russians removed all the passengers and inspected their papers. “Terrible tension filled the air. We feared discovery that we are Russian citizens,” recalled passenger Efraim Sudakevitch. Finally, all were permitted to reboard the train except for Rabbi Berel Gurewicz, who was arrested. The Ramash told the group in Paris, “It was during those exact two hours when they were held up at the border that the Rebbe said the prayer Az Yashir.” On that day, fifty families, totaling 232 men, women, and children, escaped Russia.
Six days later, the Rebbe sent the group a letter[[23: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 9, letter “To anash and the students of Tomchei Temimim” dated 15 Kislev, 5707 (December 8, 1946).]] overflowing with joy, greeting them warmly: “Blessed is the Lord, our G-d and the G-d of our forefathers and our rabbis, who saved you and your family members.” The Rebbe assured them that they would not be alone: “All of our brothers and sisters will help you with love and affection to find a livelihood and education for your children.” He expressed the hope “that soon we will meet face to face.” To support the refugees, the Rebbe appointed Rabbi Binyamin Gorodetsky as his European representative. He wrote to him[[24: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 9, letter “To my dear student Rabbi Binyamin” dated 15 Kislev, 5707 (December 8, 1946).]] the same day asking him to establish an office in Paris[[25: The office became known in the Chabad community as “the lishkah” (the bureau) and continues to operate today. See https://www.loubavitchfrance.fr/.]] to “assist them in France and other countries for now” and facilitate their future permanent resettlement. He asked Gorodetsky to create a detailed questionnaire about the refugees and “to send pictures of each family member with their names and ages on the back.[[26: Igrot Kodesh 14:393–94; Rabbi Eliyahu Matosov, HaYetziah MiRusia (Israel, 2019), 202–3.]]
In early 1947, the Great Escape came to an end when Chasidim still camped out in Lvov attempted to cross on a passenger train.[[27: January 28, 1947.]] Secret agents circulated onboard and arrested Chasidim, including escape leader Rabbi Mendel Futerfas, at the border.[[28: Mendel Futerfus (1907–95) was a legendary figure in the Chabad community. He played a leading role in the secret Jewish underground in Russia. After his arrest, he was sentenced to nine years in prison. On May 7, 1947 (17 Iyar, 5707). Futerfas was brought into interrogation. Years later, he told his grandson Yosef Yitzchak Liberov that at that moment of crisis he envisioned himself writing a letter to the Rebbe asking for a blessing, conjuring up the image of the last time he saw the Rebbe on Simchat Torah in Leningrad in 1927, the day before the Rebbe departed from Russia. Shortly afterward, Futerfas’s wife, who had escaped Russia, received a letter addressed to Reb Mendel, dated 17 Iyar, 5707, beginning with the words “Your telegram has been received.” Confused, she thought that perhaps her husband had escaped Russia and been able to send a telegram to New York. In the fall of 1963, the Soviet Union allowed Reb Mendel to reunite with his wife and children, who lived in England. When his wife showed him the letter that had always perplexed her, Reb Mendel recounted how during the interrogation, he had conjured up the image of the Rebbe and imagined himself sending a letter to the Rebbe. On that same day, the Rebbe responded to Reb Mendel, as if an actual telegram had been sent from prison. Interview with Yosef Yitzchak Liberov, JEM Oral History Project.]] The arrests were the first stage in a roundup that entrapped many Chasidim, including Sara Katzenelenbogen, another organizer.[[29: Sara Katzenelenbogen (1880–1952) was a primary organizer of the Great Escape. After the Russians assassinated her husband Michoel in 1937, she took a lead in financing the clandestine Chabad educational network in Russia. Russian authorities put her on the most wanted list; she was eventually captured in Uzbekistan. She died in prison of a heart attack.]] With the authorities closing in, the Chasidim in Lvov fled deep into Russia to evade the secret police.[[30: Dovid Margolin, “Memo to Secret Police Chief Reveals Hunt for Chabad’s Soviet Underground,” available at: chabad.org/5619816.]]
Berel Gurewicz’s wife, who had made it out of Russia, wanted to return to try to free her husband, who had been arrested for trying to escape and locked up in a local jail in Lvov. The Rebbe advised her against going. “It is preferable that he come here rather than her going there,” he said. Gurewicz and two other Chasidim, Berke Chein and Tzipa Kozliner, had been detained by local police who did not realize they were part of the large-scale organized escape. Local police were more susceptible to bribes, and this presented an opportunity. The Rebbe advised Chasidim Zalman Serebryanski and Yitzchak Goldin to remain in Poland “and help their brothers.”[[31: Letter to Rabbi Shalom Mendel Kalmenson dated 8 Iyar, 5707 (April 28, 1947). The letter appears in Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1989), chap. 117.]] He wrote that Goldin “should stay and arrange things in conjunction with my son-in-law the Rashag.” They linked up with Chasidim still in Russia in order to make connections with the jailers. Finally, a coded message from Russia arrived: The jailers had a contact in Vilnius who was willing to accept a bribe on their behalf. “Please send the medicine to the city of Rabbi Eliyahu [the Vilna Gaon] that I understand will help with all kinds of illnesses [those jailed].” The Rebbe provided seven thousand dollars ($112,000 today) to pay the bribe.
After the payment was received, conditions of the prisoners in Lvov improved, and eventually their sentences were reduced. Tzipa Kozliner was released from jail and received permission to leave Russia in 1970. Berke Chein’s death sentence was commuted, and after three years, he was freed. He immigrated to Israel in 1961.[[32: Avnei Chein: History of the Chein Family Dynasty (Kehot Publication Society, 2020), chap. 22.]] Berel Gurewicz continued to assert that there had been a mistake in his papers and he was a Polish citizen. The bribed officials included him in a prisoner exchange between Russia and Poland. Just before Passover of 1948, he was freed in Poland. He secretly crossed the border to Czechoslovakia, and with help of Vaad Hatzalah, he traveled to Paris and was reunited with his family.[[33: For the full details of the remarkable clandestine effort to free the three prisoners from jail in Russia, see the letter to Kalmenson in Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit.]]
A total of one thousand Chasidim escaped in the unprecedented secret exodus. They were dispersed among refugee camps, with over five hundred placed in a converted American air force base in Pocking, Germany. There they would remain in limbo for the next year or so, many eventually making their way to Paris and from there relocating to other countries. In the camps, Chasidim restarted their lives, setting up a yeshivah and a synagogue. Young couples got married and babies were born.
The Russian Jews had endured terrible oppression under Communist rule, preserving Judaism in an anti-religious atheistic state. They had secretly educated their children in underground yeshivas, circumcised their sons, dipped in underground mikvehs, and observed Shabbat and holidays despite harassment by the Russian secret police. They were interrogated, tortured, and jailed, some for long terms in Siberian prison camps. Their friends and relatives were killed by Stalin’s henchman. Now for the first time, they tasted freedom. Finally, they could live their lives in peace, with no restrictions on their religious observance.
Shula Kazen was a twenty-five-year-old chasidic mother who escaped Russia with her husband Zalman and their three children, making it to the Pocking refugee camp in Germany’s US-controlled zone. She recalls that the Rebbe challenged the refugees to think beyond their own needs. When the Chasidim set up a school in the camp for the Chabad children, the Rebbe asked them to also enroll other children, both religious and secular. “The Chasidim were surprised by the Rebbe’s request,” she says. In the camp, the Chasidim were mocked by the non-religious Jews for their stubborn adherence to tradition. Now the Rebbe was demanding that they reach out to them. Kazen says it was a difficult request to digest. “Exhausted by the long journey and barely processing the trauma of the Soviet Union, we did not know whether we could fulfill the Rebbe’s directive.” Yehudis Groner, who lived in Schwabisch Hall Camp with her family, says they were “broken Jews with nothing. The Rebbe wanted us to spread Yiddishkeit. He wanted us to make yeshivas to educate the kids.”[[34: Author’s interview with Yehudis Groner.]] In Poking, despite their misgivings, the Chasidim decided to try to reach out to others, and to their surprise, their efforts succeeded. Kazen recalls, “It evoked a largely positive response.”[[35: Shula Kazen (1922–2019) was brought up in Russia. Her father was arrested in 1937 and never seen again. Her mother-in-law was the legendary Sara Katzenelenbogen. In 1952, the Kazen family received US visas and wanted to settle in Brooklyn’s chasidic enclave in Crown Heights. Instead, the seventh Rebbe insisted they live in Cleveland, where they pioneered the Chabad community. See Rebbetzin Shula Kazen with Henya Laine, The Queen of Cleveland: A Life of Self-Sacrifice and Courage (Brooklyn, NY: Hasidic Archives, 2022), part 3.]]
The Rebbe dispatched a series of emissaries to Europe to help the refugees. The first was the Rebbe’s secretary, Dr. Nissan Mindel, sent to England a few months after the war’s end in September of 1945. His mandate was to “collect detailed information on the economic and spiritual status of our fellow Jews in liberated Europe”[[36: The Rebbe sent a series of letters to Jewish leaders and the Chabad community in England asking them to assist Dr. Mindel in his mission. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 9, letters dated 14 Elul, 5705 (August 23, 1945) and 15 Elul, 5705 (August 25, 1945).]] and to explore options to expand Chabad’s educational programs to the United Kingdom.
As the Russians crossed the border, the Rebbe sent Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson, who flew to Paris and then to Prague in the summer of 1946. A few of the Russians had reached Czechoslovakia, but many were still stranded in Poland. Jacobson organized a clandestine escape across the border with the help of the Brichah. From there they secured papers to permit the refugees to move to Germany’s American zone.[[37: For Jacobson’s report on his mission, see Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 117.]] Jacobson was followed by other emissaries, including the Rebbe’s son-in-law, the Rashag. They provided the Rebbe with firsthand information on the conditions the refugees faced, and they strengthened the bond between the Rebbe and his Chasidim. They assisted the Chasidim who arrived in the DP camps with setting up schools, synagogues, and other Jewish services.
The primary concern of the refugees in DP camps was where to eventually settle: the United States, Canada, Israel, or elsewhere. They turned to the Rebbe for his guidance and blessing. The refugees yearned for tranquility, but the Rebbe had a different agenda. He wanted them to become the vanguard of change for world Jewry. Like a maestro leading an orchestra, the Rebbe choreographed the settlement of his Chasidim around the globe.[[38: It was up to the individual Chasid to ask the Rebbe for advice on where to settle. There was no coercion from the Rebbe or the community.]] Some remained in France, creating the nucleus for a Chabad community that would evolve in the coming decades to become the largest Jewish movement in France. A large number went to Israel, many moved to the US, and some went to Canada, emboldening the nascent communities. At times the Chasidim would turn to the Rebbe with a list of possible destinations based on family connections, job prospects, or the opportunity to acquire visas. The Rebbe would either endorse them or propose alternative destinations, be it in Europe, South Africa, South America, or Australia. He prodded many to accept positions as rabbis, ritual slaughterers, teachers, and other community roles. The theme underlying every suggestion of destination was that the refugees were not coming to these places just to find a safe haven, but to effect positive change. Those with leadership qualities were appointed to initiate projects around the world.
One of those was Bentzion Shemtov, who was one of the nine Chasidim who took an oath with the Rebbe in 1924. Shemtov was sent to establish a Chabad in London.[[39: Shemtov was sent in October 1947.]] The Rebbe appointed Rabbi Simon Jacobson (formally Yakovshvili), who had spent a decade in Soviet prisons, as roving ambassador to visit Jewish communities throughout Europe.[[40: When Jacobson came to Rostov in 1919, he was on the way to a training program in Italy. The Rashab advised him to stay in the yeshivah in Rostov, telling him, “You will eventually get to Italy.” Indeed, he later visited Italy as part of his mission on behalf of the Rebbe, according to his grandson Rabbi Simon Jacobson.]] Jacobson reported to the Rebbe on the challenges they faced and the opportunities to develop and embolden Jewish education and tradition as these communities attempted to rebuild themselves. In the US, the Rebbe sent yeshivah students and young rabbis to visit communities. He selected Rabbi Shmuel Dovid Raichik, one of the Shanghai students, as a roving ambassador in the US, eventually sending him permanently to Los Angeles. Concerned about the spiritual welfare of Jewish students on college campuses, in 1949, the Rebbe dispatched two of his students to Brandeis University, telling them, “The time has come for us to reach out to college students.”[[41: In 1949, the Rebbe met with two students of his yeshivah, Shlomo Carlebach and Zalman Schachter, and asked them to go to Brandeis University to reach out to the students. This was the first formal foray of Chabad into college campuses. The seventh Rebbe would greatly expand Chabad’s outreach to college students, evolving into a global network of Chabad Houses, starting with UCLA in 1969. Carlebach and Schachter each broke away from the Chabad community in different ways. Carlebach remained observant and developed a new style of Jewish music. Schachter departed from tradition and created the Jewish Renewal movement. Both pushed the boundaries of halakha, creating controversy and setting themselves apart from Chabad. Interview with Schachter about Chabad, available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E9iJF0eXzD4.]]
Six Chabad families were encouraged to immigrate to Australia.[[42: Uri Kaploun, Avraham Avinu of Australia: The Life of Reb Moshe Feiglin (AAA Publications, 2002).]] The Rebbe asked Moshe Feiglin, a Chabad follower there, to help his fellow Chasidim acquire visas. They would be part of the influx of Holocaust survivors that would boost Australian Jewry. Their mission began even before they docked in Melbourne. The Rebbe instructed Nachum Zalman Gurewicz to begin outreach on the long boat ride from Europe to Australia. “During the trip you should endeavor to influence the others on the voyage, in particular the young, to study Torah.”[[43: Letter dated 23 Iyar, 5709 (May 22, 1949). In this letter sent to Gurewicz before he departed from Europe for Australia, the Rebbe wished mazel tov to Gurewicz on his son’s bar mitzvah, which would be celebrated on board the ship as it was docked in Port Said, Egypt. See Ian Grinblat, Nachum Zalman Gurewicz: A Life (Caulfield South, Australia: Makor Jewish Community Library, 2003).]] In Melbourne Gurewicz discovered an anemic community with limited Jewish education, lamenting the state of affairs in a report to the Rebbe. The Rebbe responded emphatically: “The time has come that he, along with his fellow Chasidim, should work with zealousness and joy to improve the situation.” In the Rebbe’s view, this was the reason they relocated to Australia. “This is a mission that the divine providence has brought you there [to fulfill].”[[44: Letter dated 17 Elul, 5709 (September 11, 1949). The letter appears in Grinblat, Nachum Zalman Gurewicz.]]
The Rebbe was seeking to transform the mindset of his Chasidim. Instead of seeing themselves as refugees who finally found a sanctuary, he prodded them to step forward and take on leadership roles, infusing them with a new sense of purpose. In Russia, the Chasidim had persevered to preserve Jewish life under an adversarial regime. The Western societies into which the Rebbe was dispersing his Chasidim were vastly different from Russia, with a new culture, language, and way of thinking. Now, in countries offering freedom, the Rebbe demanded that they pivot from defense to offense.
He encouraged Reb Betzalel Wilshanski, one of those sent to Australia, to become an activist. He was known for his scholarship; as a teenager he had studied in the yeshivah in Lubavitch. Now at age fifty-two, he was learning to adapt to a new world. The Rebbe exhorted him to reach out to Australian youth. “Even those who apparently don’t want to study, you should draw them closer by giving them reading material in their language. Don’t get disillusioned in your efforts to influence them.”[[45: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 10, letter dated 26 Iyar, 5709 (May 25, 1949).]]
Tzemach Gurewicz had made it out of Russia, but he was unable to secure an American visa. He took his family to Cuba in the summer of 1948 with the hope of finding a way to get from there to New York. He had endured five years in a Russian prison and longed to finally see the Rebbe and his relatives in the US. But the Rebbe wanted him to boost the community in Cuba. He wrote[[46: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 10, letter dated 7 Marcheshvan, 5709 (November 9, 1948).]] to Gurewicz’s uncle, Rabbi Moshe Leib Rodshtein, who was trying to secure visas to the US, “I do not understand why he is rushing to come here to this country. So much can be done there in the sphere of spreading Torah and boosting Jewish education.” Only after Gurewicz had set up educational programs in Cuba did the Rebbe finally tell Rodshtein, “Now is the time for Tzemach to come.”[[47: Letter dated 19 Kislev, 5709 (December 21, 1948). The Rebbe praised Gurewicz after learning about the educational programs he created in Cuba. A few months later, the Rebbe remarked to Rodshtein, “It’s time to tell Tzemach to come.” He did not arrive in New York until June of 1950, after the Rebbe’s passing. Also see “Service & Discretion: The Life and Times of the Legendary Mazkir, Reb Moshe Leib Rodshtein,” available at: https://derher.org/wp-content/uploads/105-iyar-5781-9.pdf.]]
The Rebbe also urged others to remain in their positions of leadership. Rabbi Meir Chaikin was appointed as a rabbi in Stockholm, Sweden. Disillusioned with the lackluster religious community, he wanted to relocate. The Rebbe rejected that idea. “You should consider your arrival in Stockholm a great honor that divine providence has chosen you to illuminate with the light of Torah in an unplanted field,” the Rebbe wrote to him. In the merit of this “devotion in fulfilling the mission of your soul, G-d will bless you and your family with goodness.”[[48: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 10, letter dated 13 Tamuz, 5709 ( July 10, 1949).]]
Rabbi Yirmiyahu Aloy, a Chabad Chasid, immigrated to South Africa from Lithuania before the War. In 1948, he met with the Rebbe in New York. The Nationalist Afrikaner Party had just been victorious in the elections. “Everyone thought it would be disastrous for the Jews. They anticipated another Holocaust,”[[49: Interview with Winnie Gourarie, JEM Oral History Project, N’shei Chabad Journal, Nisan 2018. Also see audio recording of Rabbi Aloy speaking at a farbrengen (South Africa, 1962) celebrating 12 Tamuz, the anniversary of the Rebbe’s release from Russian prison, available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kd04_J4bLu0&t=1282s.]] recalled his daughter Winnie Gourarie. Apprehensive, Aloy asked the Rebbe in a private meeting if he should leave. The Rebbe laughed and responded in Yiddish, “Fuhr aheim (go back home).” Winnie says, “There was nothing to talk about, so he went home.” With time, Aloy emerged as one of the country’s most prominent rabbis, taking a leadership role in the community’s prestigious rabbinical court.
While the Rebbe wanted his Chasidim to take on communal roles, he also wanted them to seek employment and become financially self-sufficient. Many Chasidim transferred from the refugee camps to France, where the JDC generously supported them. This dependence on charity concerned the Rebbe, who told community leaders[[50: Letter to Rabbi Shalom Mendel Kalmenson dated 8 Iyar, 5707 (April 28, 1947).]] that the time had come for the Chasidim to become self-sufficient. He wrote to the community, “My cherished anash and students of Tomchei Temimim, who are dear to my heart: It is inappropriate what you are doing, nor is it the way of Chasidism, to sit with folded hands and depend on the support of the JDC.” The Rebbe added that the support was a good thing on an interim basis. “When you come to a new place, a foreign environment, you need help for a short time.” But he emphasized that it should not become a permanent arrangement. “Each one of you must make an effort to earn a livelihood, each person in his distinctive way. Exert yourselves and move quickly, be it in an institution of Torah, business, or employment. Each person will be guided along the path that is best for them.”[[51: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 9, letter to the Chasidim and students in Paris, 28 Iyar, 5709 ( June 3, 1948).]]
It was not only his own Chasidim whom the Rebbe urged to move to smaller religious communities. Hungarian Holocaust survivor Herman Kohen had Australian relatives who sponsored his relocation there. On the way, he stopped in New York to bid farewell to his family.[[52: Kohen’s brother-in-law was the father of yeshivah student Herschel Feigelstock. JEM Oral History Project interview.]] With doubts about the move, he consulted his rabbi from Budapest, Rabbi Yonason Shteif, who had moved to Brooklyn. He told him to remain in New York. “There is no Yiddishkeit in Australia. Stay here in the US and live in our community.” Conflicted, Kohen decided to seek the guidance of the Rebbe, who advised him to see this as an opportunity. “You say there is no Yiddishkeit there – you will make there Yiddishkeit.” In Melbourne, Kohen became an integral part of the resurgence of traditional Jewish life.[[53: In that meeting, the Rebbe also told him, “Eventually you will move to Eretz Yisrael.” Later in life, he relocated there, as the Rebbe had predicted.]]
The Rebbe’s dispersion of Chasidim around the world created multiple challenges. They had to adapt to the norms of Western society, quite different from their experience in Russia and Poland, and at the same time remain true to their mission of implanting traditional Judaism. The Rebbe exhorted his Chasidim to transfer the ideals of self-sacrifice to a new paradigm in Western democracies. Instead of government oppression, they faced assimilation, indifference, and movements that wanted to alter basic Jewish ideas to create a new version of Judaism. In Western countries, Jewish communal leadership had shifted from the European model, where rabbis held sway, to a structure dominated by lay leaders. Boards hired and fired and dictated to rabbis what they should do and how to observe. The Rebbe’s goal was to reassert the role of rabbis in communal governance. Instead of a board of well-intentioned Jews deciding the standards of tradition and communal priorities, he wanted the rabbis, rooted in scholarship, to assert leadership. These refugees were not longtime residents with local roots. Rather, communities had opened their hearts to welcome them. The Rebbe was instructing his Chasidim to challenge the norms in the very communities that provided them with a chance to restart their lives.
That was the very dilemma that faced Rabbi Nachum Zalman Gurewicz in Melbourne.[[54: Grinblat, Nachum Zalman Gurewicz.]] He started a business with a great desire to help the new yeshivah. Every Sunday he would visit local Jews in their homes to seek financial support. One week, he went to the home of Victor Smorgon, a successful immigrant who had built a major meat business in Australia. Smorgon challenged Gurewicz’s old-world style. “Why do you insist on wearing a beard in twentieth-century Melbourne?” he asked. Gurewicz retorted, “Stalin could not get me to remove it and surely you won’t.” Deeply offended by the question and the condescending tone, Gurewicz walked out of the house. Smorgon was surprised and ran after him to apologize. They became lifelong friends after that, and Smorgon became a key supporter of the yeshivah.[[55: After Gurewicz’s passing, Smorgon dedicated a building at the Yeshivah Center in Melbourne in his memory. See Grinblat, Nachum Zalman Gurewicz.]]
The Rebbe showered his Chasidim with blessings about the nobility of dedicating their lives to others. Many of them, tired from years of oppression in Russia and having suffered from the chaos of war, craved a life that was not so challenging. They yearned to live in communities with others who shared their values. Instead, the Rebbe urged them to be agents of change in existing communities, to create communal infrastructure in cities that lacked the basics of Jewish observance. The shift in mindset for both the Russians and the Poles was a daunting transition.
Despite the Rebbe’s exhortations there was resistance to the change in mentality. The transition would take time, gaining momentum when the children of the refugees became yeshivah students during the era of the Rebbe’s successor, the seventh Rebbe. He would expand the vision of his father-in-law of creating a global cadre of shluchim that would transform world Jewry.
The Rebbe was deeply concerned with the spiritual and material welfare of Eretz Yisrael. Chabad had been active in Israel since the eighteenth century. Colel Chabad, the oldest charitable organization in the country, was established in 1788 by Chabad’s founder, Rabbi Schneur Zalman, to support the early chasidic immigration from Europe.[[56: “Israel’s Oldest Charity,” available at: chabad.org/2098354.]] There were Chabad yeshivas and a network of synagogues, but their focus was inward, toward the needs of the Chasidim. To create opportunities for the refugees and to refocus Chabad in Israel to a wider role, the Rebbe established Kfar Chabad, a village on the outskirts of Tel Aviv.
The idea crystallized when Zionist leader Zalman Shazar[[57: Zalman Shazar (1889–1974) was born Schneur Zalman Rubashov to a Chabad family in Mir, near Minsk in Belorussia. As a young man he became involved in Poalei Tzion, a Zionist group. He immigrated to Palestine in 1924, taking a leadership role in Zionist activities.


Afterword + Appendix
A Maamar in Brooklyn
It had been a year since the shocking passing of the Rebbe. Chasidim flocked to 770 in Brooklyn to mark the first yahrzeit (anniversary of his passing) with a farbrengen. The question on everyone’s mind was whether the Ramash would succeed his father-in-law by becoming the seventh Lubavitcher Rebbe. Unlike the Rashab, who left instructions that his son succeed him, the Rayatz had left no clear directive. In the immediate wake of the Rebbe’s passing, there had been some jostling within the chasidic community. Some Chasidim felt that the eldest son-in-law, Rabbi Shmaryahu Gurary, should be the next Rebbe. With time, however, his support faded, and Chasidim gravitated toward Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the Ramash.
For the last twelve months, Chasidim from around the world had sent letters to New York urging the Ramash to become Rebbe, signing a ktav hitkarut, a pledge of loyalty to him. Until now, the Ramash had repeatedly rebuffed these entreaties. According to chasidic theologian Rabbi Yoel Kahn, “The Ramash was very reserved, a private person. Public leadership was the opposite of his character.”[[1: Author’s interview with Rabbi Yoel Kahn.]]
A few weeks before the yahrzeit, a distinguished group of New York Chasidim met with the Ramash. They presented him with a letter signed by Chasidim throughout the US declaring him the new Rebbe. When the Ramash read the first line, he broke down in tears, telling them, “This has no connection to me.”[[2: Yemei Bereishit.]]
Despite the Ramash’s unwillingness to assume leadership, the Chasidim were still determined that he become the next Rebbe. They had witnessed the years of mentorship that the Rayatz had given the Ramash. Since his arrival in America in 1941, the Rayatz had entrusted him with important projects and responsibilities. They had also observed the Ramash’s phenomenal deference to the Rayatz. Chasidim would often say that the Rayatz had only one real Chasid: the Ramash. He had been leading farbrengens regularly in Brooklyn, impressing the Chasidim with his warm spirit and his encyclopedic knowledge of Torah. It seemed only fitting.
The real test would come on the yahrzeit: Would the Ramash give in to the will of the Chasidim and say a maamar, thereby accepting the position of Rebbe, or would he continue to reject their request? Many say it was his wife who propelled him to his final decision, imploring, “If you don’t become Rebbe, the work of my father will have been for naught.”[[3: Greenglass, “The 22nd of Shevat”]]
The small synagogue in 770 was packed to the rafters when the Ramash finally entered at 9:45 p.m. for the farbrengen. The Chasidim sang a melody, after which the Ramash began to speak about strengthening the bond between the Rebbe and his Chasidim. “Each of us must continue the task the Rebbe entrusted us with.” He then explored the concept of ahavat Yisrael, the central mitzvah of the responsibility to love every Jew.
The crowd grew restless. The question was on everyone’s mind: Would the Ramash say a maamar as his predecessors did when they became Rebbe? Suddenly, Rabbi Sender Nemtzov, one of the chasidic elders, rose. He was over eighty years old and had been a student in the yeshivah in Lubavitch and a rabbi in Manchester, England, for many years. Surprising the crowd, he proclaimed, “We want the Rebbe to say chasidut [a maamar]!”
Absolute silence filled the room as the crowd held its breath, all eyes on the Ramash. To everyone’s delight, the new Rebbe broke the silence and began his first maamar. He started by referencing the last maamar the Rayatz had published on the eve of his passing. “My father-in-law, the Rebbe, of blessed memory, writes as follows in the maamar that he released for the day of his passing, the tenth of Shevat 5710 (1950), [based on the verse in Song of Songs]: ‘I have come into my garden, my sister, my bride.’”[[4: “The Rebbe’s First Maamar,” available at: chabad.org/2333961.]]
He then expounded on the themes of his father-in-law’s maamar.[[5: In the years that followed, on 10 Shevat, his father-in-law’s yahrzeit, the seventh Rebbe would teach a maamar built on a concept from the Rayatz’s last maamar.]]
When the new Rebbe finished the first part of the maamar, he paused and asked everyone to say lechaim (a toast). Nemtzov surprised the crowd again. Despite his advanced age, he leaped onto a table and called out, “Chasidim, we have a Rebbe!” before loudly proclaiming Shehechiyanu (the blessing for good tidings).[[6: Yemei Bereishit.]]
This would become the motif of the seventh Lubavitcher Rebbe: Just as the theme of his first maamar was based on the teachings of the Rayatz, in his tenure as Rebbe, he built on the foundation established by the Rayatz, expanding Chabad into the largest Jewish movement in the world. Time and again, he referred to the teachings and directives of his father-in-law as his guiding light.
Forty-two years later, in 1994, when the seventh Rebbe passed away,[[7: The seventh Rebbe passed away in Brooklyn on 3 Tamuz, 5754 ( June 3, 1994) at ninety-two years old. His teachings and ideas continue to inspire the movement. Both Rebbes are interred in Montefiore Cemetery in New York. Close to one million people, Jews and non-Jews alike, have visited the Ohel (the resting place of the Rebbes) to offer prayers. See ohel.com and therebbe.org.]] he was interred alongside his father-in-law. Today, hundreds of thousands flock to pray at this holy site every year. The two graves are enveloped by stone walls that rise up to the open sky. Two simple granite headstones mark the resting place of the two great leaders of modern Jewish life who transformed Jewish destiny and created a spiritual renaissance that continues to reach every community in the world.
Appendix 1
The Seven Lubavitcher Rebbes
* Rabbi Schneur Zalman of Liadi, the Alter Rebbe (Yiddish for “old Rebbe”), 1745–1812
* Rabbi Dov Ber, the Mitteler Rebbe (Yiddish for “middle Rebbe”), 1773–1827
* Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneersohn, the Tzemach Tzedek (the title of his classic work on Jewish law), 1789–1866
* Rabbi Shmuel Schneersohn, the Rebbe Maharash, 1834–82
* Rabbi Sholom Dovber Schneersohn, the Rebbe Rashab 1860–1920
* Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn, the Rayatz or Frierdiker Rebbe (Yiddish for “previous Rebbe”), 1880–1950
* Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, today known as “the Rebbe” (1902–94)
Founders of the Chasidic Movement
* Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov, 1700–60
* Rabbi Dovber, the Maggid (preacher) of Mezeritch, d. 1772
Publications of Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn
Some two hundred volumes of the Rebbe’s teachings have been published. A full catalogue is available at kehotonline.com. English publications are available at chabad.org/3574953.
Timeline of the life of Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn*
1880 (5640): Birth of the Rebbe in Lubavitch, Russia, on July 12 (12 Tamuz).
1895 (5655): Begins communal work as the personal secretary of his father.
1897 (5657): Marries Nechama Dina Schneersohn on August 22 (13 Elul).
1898 (5658): Appointed head of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim.
1901 (5651): Travels to Vilna, Brisk, Lodz, and Koenigsberg to establish the Dubrovna factory.
1902 (5662): Travels to St. Petersburg for communal matters.
1905 (5665): Participates in organizing a fund to provide Passover needs to Russian troops in the Far East.
1906 (5666): Travels to Germany and Holland and persuades bankers there to use their influence to stop pogroms.
1908 (5668): Participates in organizing the Vilna Conference.
1909 (5669): Travels to Germany to confer with communal leaders.
1910 (5670): Involved with preparing for the Rabbinical Conference. Between 1902 and 1911, he is arrested four times in Moscow and St. Petersburg due to his activity.
1920 (5680): After the passing of the Rebbe Rashab in Rostov, accepts position of sixth Lubavitcher Rebbe.
1921 (5681): Arranges program to strengthen Judaism in Russia, establishes Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim in Warsaw.
1924 (5684): Forced to leave Rostov and relocate in St. Petersburg. Intensifies efforts to strengthen Jewish life in Russia. Establishes Agudas Chassidei Chabad in the United States.
1927 (5687): Establishes yeshivas in Bukhara, Russia. Arrested, sentenced to death, exiled to Kostroma, and forced to depart Russia for Latvia.
1928–29 (5688–89): Campaigns to have matzah sent to Russia.
1929–30 (5689–90): Visits Eretz Yisrael and the United States.
1934 (5694): Moves to Warsaw, Poland.
1935 (5695): Begins publication of Hatomim journal.
1936 (5696): Moves Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim and his residence to Otwock, Poland.
1940 (5700): Arrives in New York after escaping from Poland. Settles in Brooklyn and establishes Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim.
1941 (5701): Begins publication of the journal HaKriah VeHaKedushah, founds Machne Israel.
1942 (5702): Establishes Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim in Montreal; establishes yeshivas in Newark, Worcester, and Pittsburgh; establishes Kehot Publication Society.
1945 (5705): Establishes relief office for refugees with a branch in Paris; establishes Shaloh for religious instruction for public school children; launches outreach program for Jewish farmers.
1948 (5708): Establishes Kfar Chabad in Israel for Russian refugees.
1950 (5710): Lays the foundation for a Jewish educational network in North Africa. On January 28 (10 Shevat), passes away and is interred in New York.
* The corresponding Jewish year given in parentheses is based on the timeline in HaYom Yom (New York: Otzar Chasidim).
Appendix 2
Below is a timeline of the Rebbe’s travels from the time of his return to Riga in 1930 until his departure for the United States in 1940. It is based on a variety of historical sources, but there may be slight inaccuracies due to the difficulty in tracking every one of the Rebbe’s travels. Thank you to Yoel Shernofsky for compiling this timeline.
1930 (5690): Returning to Europe after the trip to America
The Rebbe departs from the United States on Thursday, July 17, 1930 (21 Tamuz 5690), arriving in Breman, Germany, on July 23 (27 Tamuz). From there he travels to Berlin for Tisha B’Av on August 3. Before returning to Riga, he stops in Marienbad for two weeks to recover from the long and arduous overseas trip. He then heads home, stopping in Berlin for a few days, and arrives in Riga on September 8 (15 Elul).
1930–31 (5691)
He stays in Riga for most of the year. From Wednesday, February 18, 1931 (Rosh Chodesh Adar) until February 26 (9 Adar) the Rebbe visits Rakshik in Lithuania. The purpose of this visit was to give an opportunity for the Chasidim in the surrounding area to visit the Rebbe. On Wednesday, June 24 (9 Tamuz), the Rebbe departs from Riga. He heads to Warsaw for two weeks to survey the situation of the yeshivah there and explore the possibility of relocating there himself. He spends Shabbat July 4 (13 Tamuz) in Otwock. On July 8 (23 Tamuz), the Rebbe travels to Marienbad, departing back to Riga on August 13 (Rosh Chodesh Elul). He makes a short stop in Berlin, arriving home on August 20 (7 Elul).
He travels to Poland for the holidays, departing Riga on September 4 (21 Elul).
1931–32 (5692)
The Rebbe remains in Poland, dividing his time between Warsaw and Otwock until October 21 (10 Cheshvan), when he returns to Riga.
On March 8, 1932 (30 Adar Alef), the Rebbe travels to Lithuania, visiting the communities of Glubok and Pastov, among other townlets. He returns to Riga on March 17 (9 Adar Bet).
The Rebbe departs Riga a few days before the holiday of Shavuot, June 10–11, and travels to Landvarov, Poland, to celebrate the marriage of his youngest daughter, Sheina, to Mendel Horenstein. The wedding takes place on June 14 (10 Sivan). A few days after the wedding, the Rebbe travels to the town of Druskenig, where he stays for about two months for medical treatment for his feet.
On August 24 (23 Av), the Rebbe heads out to Ludmir, stopping along the way in Brisk and Kovel. On August 30 (28 Av), he heads back to Riga. He stops in Warsaw and Vienna along the way, saying a maamar in each city. He arrives home in Riga on September 10 (9 Elul).
1932–33 (5693)
On January 10, 1933 (12 Tevet) the Rebbe travels to Berlin for medical care, remaining there approximately two months.
In March (exact dates unknown), the Rebbe travels to Paris, retuning to Riga on March 21 (23 Adar).
On July 4, the Rebbe leaves Riga. At this time, he is leaving Riga permanently, though that has not been announced publicly. On July 5, the Rebbe stops in Warsaw and leads a farbrengen in the yeshivah before departing for Marienbad, where he arrives on Friday, July 7 (13 Tamuz). The Rebbe stays in Marienbad until August 21 (29 Av) and then travels to Warsaw, his new permanent residence.
1933–34 (5694)
The Rebbe is now officially living in Warsaw. He visits Riga from February 27–March 7, 1934 (12–20 Adar) and then returns to Warsaw. During his visit in Riga, the Rebbe says a series of maamarim and speaks to the women of the community.
On Sunday, June 3, the Rebbe leaves Warsaw. He travels to Glubok in Lithuania, stopping along the way in Vilna. He remains in Glubok till Tuesday, June 19 (6 Tamuz). This was a very inspiring visit for the Chasidim of the region. He returns to Warsaw, traveling on July 5 (22 Tamuz) to Marienbad.
On July 27 (15 Av), the Rebbe visits Prague on his way back to Warsaw, returning on July 30 or August 1 (18 or 20 Elul).
1934–35 (5695)
On November 13 (6 Kislev 5695), the Rebbe travels to the West End Sanitorium in Perchtoldsdorf (located right outside Vienna) to be treated for health-related issues by Dr. Max Gerson. The Rebbe remains there for almost half a year.
On December 30 (4 Tevet), the Rebbe farbrengs in Vienna in the home of Reb Klonimus Kalman Poppenheim.
Before returning to Warsaw, the Rebbe spends a few days in Vienna, meeting local Jews and conducting communal affairs. He returns to Warsaw on April 15 (12 Nisan), just before Passover.
During the summer months of 1935 (starting in late June/Sivan), the Rebbe stays in the countryside next to Warsaw in the Otwock area. He returns to Warsaw in mid-August (around Rosh Chodesh Elul). On Thursday, September 19, (21 Elul) the Rebbe relocates permanently to Otwock. The main yeshivah in Warsaw is also transferred there.
1935–36 (5696)
On January 12, 1936 (17 Tevet), the Rebbe returns to the sanatorium in Perchtoldsdorf for medical treatment. He returns to Warsaw on February 17 (24 Shevat), attending the bar mitzvah of his grandson, Shalom Ber (Berke) Gurary, on February 18–19 (25–26 Shevat).
On Sunday, June 28, the Rebbe travels to Paris for medical treatment, staying in the Sanitorium in Ville-d’Avray, a suburb right outside Paris. He remains in Paris until the end of August. Before departing, he says a maamar in the chasidic community in Paris on August 26 (8 Elul).
On the way back to Otwock, the Rebbe stops in Vienna for about a week and then Perchtoldsdorf for a few days. He returns to Otwock on September 9 (22 Elul).
1936–37 (5697)
On Sunday, December 27, the Rebbe departs Otwock for Vienna (Perchtoldsdorf) for medical treatment, remaining there about a week. The Rebbe then travels to Paris, arriving on January 4, 1937 (21 Tevet) and staying till February 18 (7 Adar). The Rebbe then returns to Perchtoldsdorf, traveling home to Otwock on Tuesday, March 23 (11 Nisan).
On June 15 (6 Tamuz), the Rebbe travels to Perchtoldsdorf for medical treatment, staying until August 26 (19 Elul). He returns to Otwock for the holidays.
1937–38 (5698)
On December 28 (24 Tevet), the Rebbe returns to Perchtoldsdorf, stays until March 9 (6 Adar Alef), and then departs for Paris. Three days after his departure from Austria, the Germans annex Austria. In Paris, the Rebbe stays at the Sanitorium in Ville-d’Avray until April 13 (12 Nisan), returning to Otwock in time for Passover.
1938–39 (5699)
The Rebbe is in Otwock for most of the year. He travels to Riga for health reasons, staying there from January 24, 1939 (4 Shevat) until March 31 (11 Nisan).
A few days after the war breaks out, on September 5 (21 Elul), the Rebbe leaves Otwock for Warsaw.
1939–40 (5700)
The Rebbe is rescued by the German Army and departs Warsaw on December 14 (21 Kislev), arriving in Riga on Sunday, December 18 (25 Kislev). He departs Riga on March 4, 1940 (24 Adar Alef) for Stockholm, Sweden, boarding a ship in Gothenburg on March 7 (27 Adar Alef) and finally arriving in the United States on March 19, 1940 (9 Adar Bet).