The Rebbe returned from his yearlong trip just before the High Holidays of 1930. As the holiday season concluded in Riga and the Chasidim returned home, the Rebbe stood at a crossroads. To the east lay millions of Jews locked behind the Iron Curtain, subject to rising totalitarianism and the beginnings of Stalin’s reign of terror. To the west was Poland, the center of European religious life, with the task of reinvigorating Chabad’s yeshivah system so it could birth new generations of Chasidim. Around the world there were scattered emerging Chabad communities that required nurturing. Specifically, across the Atlantic was a growing Chabad community, now spiritually invigorated from the Rebbe’s visit. In the coming years, the Rebbe would face serious health challenges, and just over the horizon was the ominous rise of militarism in Germany. All of this would require major financial resources. While the visit to the US had broadened the base of support for the Rebbe’s work, the impact of the Depression limited that potential.
But the most pressing question was where the Rebbe’s permanent place of residence should be. Riga remained an option; it was close to Russia, enabling the Rebbe to help the Jews there more easily. An idea had been floated to establish a Chabad yeshivah in Riga, something that was dear to the Rebbe’s heart. America was another option. The Chasidim there had been galvanized during the Rebbe’s visit. In New York, a committee had formed[[1: The first meeting of the New York committee took place in June 1930, while the Rebbe while still in the US.]] and requested the Rebbe to move there; the Chicago Chasidim had also extended an invitation. The Jewish future seemed to be in America, and the philanthropy of US Jews could help the Rebbe assist those still in Russia. At the same time, Chasidim in Poland were entreating the Rebbe to relocate to Warsaw, the epicenter of European Jewish life and home to the Rebbe’s flagship yeshivah. The Rashab had entrusted the yeshivah to the Rebbe, and he viewed it as a sacred responsibility. It was also the key to Chabad’s future. Only by inspiring a new generation of Chasidim could Chabad thrive in Western Europe. The Rebbe’s close proximity to the Warsaw yeshivah would make him its spiritual anchor, raise its prestige, and enable him to mentor its students more directly.
The fear that the Rebbe might move to the US spurred the European Chasidim who had flocked to Riga for the holidays to take action. They convened Saturday evening after Rosh HaShanah to formally establish Agudas Chassidei Chabad (Association of Chabad Chasidim) of Poland, Lithuania, and Latvia.[[2: The meeting was held in the Rashag’s home in Riga. See Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2011), 76–77, for a copy of the letter sent to the Rebbe by the group of Polish Chasidim who had been in Riga for the holidays.]] The new organization’s goals were to unite the Chabad community, reinforce the study of chasidic philosophy, and create a financial foundation to enable the Rebbe’s relocation to Warsaw. The next day, they wrote to the Rebbe, “Our souls were deeply disturbed when we heard that anash in the US were requesting that the Rebbe relocate there.” Asserting that Warsaw was “the most appropriate place for the Rebbe to reside,” they assured him that they would do whatever was needed for such a move. They noted that the yeshivah students would greatly benefit from the “light and kindness” that would shine with the Rebbe in their midst. It would also strengthen the Rebbe’s bond with his Chasidim, since many could not travel to Riga due to visa restrictions and travel costs.
For a while it seemed that the Rebbe would accept the request to come to America, but finally he resolved to remain in Europe. Writing to his US Chasidim a few weeks after the holidays, he said, “I enjoyed hearing their tremendous arousal of love and friendship, which is very precious to me, in their suggestion to relocate, with G-d’s help, our residence and settle in their country.” The Rebbe lauded them for their noble intentions “for the sake of Heaven and the benefit of Chasidim,” and most importantly, their aspiration of “spreading of Torah in the spirit of Tomchei Temimim.” Nonetheless, he informed them that he would be remaining in Europe “due to the spiritual needs of the Chabad community [in Europe], my communal duties here, and my responsibilities for the yeshivas here.” Quoting the talmudic teaching, “A person may not demolish a synagogue until he has built another synagogue in its place,”[[3: Bava Batra 3b. According to the Talmud, if a synagogue is destroyed with a plan to rebuild a new one, unforeseen circumstances might make the reconstruction impossible, leaving the community with no place to pray. Also, there may be no other place to pray during the period of construction.]] the Rebbe implied that coming to America now would weaken Chabad’s work in Europe. The Rebbe was also concerned about “the weakness of my health.” He didn’t reject the idea of moving to the US outright, indicating that it could happen in the future with proper preparation “to build a stronger foundation.” He encouraged the Chasidim to “unify in a stronger way and increase the study of chasidic philosophy.” Ultimately, he said, the time was not ripe, as “such a thing does not happen by itself – it needs work.”[[4: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to “My friends, anash,” dated 18 Cheshvan, 5691 (November 9, 1920). The Rebbe’s long letter to US Chasidim brims with emotion and affection, emphasizing the pleasure the Rebbe had from his visit with them. He noted that much needs to be done to prepare for the transition of the center of Lubavitch from Europe to America. “Each thing needs preparation. Something like this needs a spiritual and practical foundation, and it cannot come about from itself. It demands effort to organize in a structured fashion.” He says that it is indeed possible, “since nothing can restrain a person’s will.” In a second letter written the same day to the US Chabad Committee, he instructs them to implement three practical suggestions: to unify and increase the study of chasidic philosophy, to support the network of Chabad yeshivas in Europe, and to strengthen the tradition of maamad, the ongoing support by Chasidim of the Rebbe’s work.]] A week later, Feigin wrote to the New York committee chair Rabbi Nissan Telushkin, “The decision to move to the US is deferred for now.”
When the Rebbe did end up fleeing to the US after the 1939 Nazi invasion of Poland, he viewed it as an orchestration of divine providence. Reflecting then on his hesitation to relocate a decade earlier, the Rebbe asserted that he would not have been effective at that time. He bemoaned the attitude of US Jewish leaders who were failing to uphold classic Jewish values. “Even rabbis” rationalized making compromises, he said. “This is the way of the world.”[[5: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 6, letter to Rabbi Shmuel Levitin dated 26 Cheshvan, 5702 (November 11, 1941).]]
To bolster US Jewry and the Chabad community, the Rebbe dispatched a series of emissaries to the US in the 1930s. He selected inspirational role models, Chasidim of spiritual stature and scholarship, as “shadars,” ambassadors of the Rebbe, to teach Torah, spread chasidic teachings, and raise funds. The first was Rabbi Yitzchak Horowitz, known as Reb Itche der Masmid (literally, “the diligent student”), celebrated for his remarkable devotion to Jewish learning and piety. He arrived in New York a few weeks before the High Holidays in 1933 and spent two years in the US. “His sanctity and kindness made a great impression,” Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson wrote.[[6: Zikhron Livnei Yisrael – Memoirs of Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson: 1907–1939 [Hebrew] (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1996), chap. 33.]] The burgeoning Chabad community in New York was so enamored with him that they decided to immediately collect a sum of five thousand dollars ($100,000 today). “We had to borrow most of the money, but we did it because we wanted to ensure Reb Itche’s success in the US.” During his visit, Reb Itche traveled to communities, teaching Chasidism and raising funds for the Rebbe’s work in Europe. In Boston, he stayed in the home of Shmaya Krinsky, his daughter Rivkah recalls.[[7: Author’s interview with Rivkah Krinksy.]] “He made a big impression on us.” Then fourteen years old, it was the first time she saw such extraordinary dedication to Torah study. “We would go by his room at night, and he would never sleep. He would stand and learn the whole night with a book on the bureau.” His visit was so successful that the Rebbe wanted to send him a second time, but he could not secure a visa. The Rebbe encountered the same legal barriers with other rabbis he wanted to send.
In 1938, the Rebbe dispatched Rabbi Mordechai Cheifetz to the US. The students of New York yeshivas such as Torah Vodaath were drawn to him. He led chasidic gatherings that “lasted almost till dawn,” writes Jacobson.[[8: Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, chap. 36.]] Avraham Hecht, then a teenager, was captivated by Cheifetz. “He used to farbreng three times a week and we were swallowed up by him. He could melt a stone. He melted me.”[[9: Author’s interview with Avraham Hecht.]] Hecht says Cheifetz got everyone excited about the Rebbe. “We began to truly want to see the Rebbe.” A year later, Hecht and five friends traveled to study in the yeshivah in Otwock.
When Cheifetz returned to Poland, he spent ten days with the Rebbe over the holiday of Shavuot. The Rebbe was not well. “My health is weak,” he told Cheifetz, who provided detailed reports to the Rebbe about each of the US Chasidim and their families. The news bolstered the Rebbe’s spirits and even affected his physical condition. “At that moment he actually looked healthy,” recalled Cheifetz. “I saw that as the Rebbe looked at each name on the list, his face shone and he could see the person in his mind, He told me, ‘I desire to see each one individually.’”[[10: Letters from Cheifetz to Jacobson, reprinted in Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, chap. 36.]]
A year later, in 1939, the Rebbe appointed Rabbi Shmuel Levitin as an emissary. Born in 1883, he had been sent by Rebbe Rashab to Soviet Georgia, where he was imprisoned for his religious activities, finally escaping Russia in 1937. Like the other emissaries, he was a model of piety and scholarship. He arrived in the US just before the High Holidays and visited communities across the country. The war’s outbreak prevented Levitin’s return to Europe. Tragically, his wife was trapped there and killed by the Nazis. Levitin emerged as one of the chasidic elders, playing a major role in the development of Chabad in the US.[[11: “Shmuel Levitin, 91, Lubavitcher Figure,” The New York Times, Aug. 31, 1974, available at: https://www.nytimes.com/1974/08/31/archives/shmuel-levitin-91-lubavitcher-figure.html.]]
The Rebbe also encouraged Chasidim in Europe to immigrate to the US. One Chasid, Yochanan Gordon, had three brothers who moved to America. When the Rebbe returned to Riga, he asked Gordon, “Why don’t you join your brothers? They will arrange a visa for you.” He responded, “I don’t want my children to go off the derekh (stop observing the Torah),” explaining that his brothers’ children were no longer religious. The Rebbe assured him, “Move to America, and I promise you that your children will remain religious Jews.” This wasn’t enough for Gordon. He told the Rebbe that he wanted his children to learn in the Rebbe’s yeshivah. The Rebbe assured him again. “I promise you that they will learn in my yeshivas.” Gordon immigrated a year later,[[12: Yochanan Gordon immigrated at the end of 1931 (Chanukah 5692), and his family followed in August 1934. It was common for immigrants to the US to come alone and establish themselves before bringing their families.]] and the Rebbe’s guarantee was fulfilled in 1940 when Gordon’s oldest son Shalom Ber became one of the first students in the yeshivah the Rebbe opened in Brooklyn.
While in Poland, the Rebbe had bold ideas to reach out to Jews across America. In a letter to Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz,[[13: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 4, letter dated 18 Tamuz, 5698 ( July 17, 1938).]] the Rebbe described his plan of sending “outstanding yeshivah students to cities across the US to teach chasidic philosophy.” The idea was for them to “spend longer times in communities,” with their mission being “only spiritual.” The Rebbe urged Rabinowitz to find sponsors to back this ambitious undertaking. At the time, the project did not come to fruition, though it did become a reality later, after the Rebbe relocated to the US. In 1943,[[14: This program continues on a global level today. See https://www.merkosshlichus.com/about.]] he began sending yeshivah students to various American Jewish communities.
Even after the Rebbe made the fateful decision to remain in Europe, there was still the question of whether he would live in Poland or Latvia. A major factor was his desire was to live in proximity to Tomchei Temimim. As Feigin wrote, “He must be next to a yeshivah, which means either moving near the yeshivah in Warsaw or opening a new branch in Riga.”[[15: Letter to Jacobson dated 15 Av, 5691 ( July 29, 1931).]] To explore the options, the Rebbe traveled to Warsaw, home to Chabad’s flagship yeshivah, the summer after returning from the US.[[16: 9 Tamuz, 5691 ( June 24, 1931).]] The purpose, wrote Feigin, was to conduct a “deep internal review of the yeshivah.”[[17: Letter to Jacobson dated 15 Av, 5691 ( July 29, 1931).]]
News of the Rebbe’s visit electrified the Warsaw yeshivah students and those in the branches in Vilnius and Lodz. Moshe Gerlitzky,[[18: Moshe Eliyahu Gerlitzky (1914–2020) was originally from Lodz and studied in Chabad yeshivas in Poland, Lithuania, and Shanghai. He was one of the nine students who founded the Chabad yeshivah in Montreal in 1941. Mordechai Lightstone, “From Lodz to Montreal: The Life of Rabbi Moshe Eliyahu Gerlitzky,” available at: https://www.lubavitch.com/from-lodz-to-montreal-the-life-of-rabbi-moshe-eliyahu-gerlitzky/.]] then a student in Lodz, recalls, “The dean of the yeshivah permitted us to travel to Warsaw to meet the Rebbe, but only if we studied thirty blatt (double-sided pages) of Talmud and knew twelve chapters of Tanya by heart.” Thirty out of one hundred students qualified, and they chartered a bus to join the festivities in Warsaw. A group from Vilnius also came.[[19: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Dovid Helman of Bern from Marienbad, 5 Menachem Av, 5691 ( July 19, 1931).]]
Gerlitzky joined the yeshivah students and thousands of Warsaw’s Jews at the gates of the yeshivah’s courtyard to welcome the Rebbe before Shabbat. It was an inspirational few days with the Rebbe. He spent much of Shabbat day in prayer, not ending till 4:00 p.m. Then the Rebbe taught two maamarim. Yeshivah student Aryeh Leib Kramer recalled, “This is the first maamar that I heard from the Rebbe. The Rebbe’s speech was strong; wherever we stood we could hear his voice.”[[20: Kfar Chabad, issue no. 879, 2 Kislev, 5760, p. 82.]] On Sunday evening the Rebbe led a farbrengen until midnight in honor of his release from prison four years earlier. On Monday and Tuesday, the Rebbe met privately with each of the students. Gerlitzky was one of them. “Each had a yechidut (private audience) with the Rebbe. He took a great interest in every student, specifically asking about his studies.” The students from Lodz and Vilnius returned to their yeshivas, and the Rebbe spent a few more days in Warsaw before heading to Marienbad and Riga.[[21: Rabbi Sholom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia (History of Chabad in Poland, Lithuania, and Latvia) (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2011), 138; Reshimat HaYoman, 445.]] The visit gave the Rebbe “great nachat (pleasure),” Feigin wrote to Jacobson.[[22: Cheshvan 5692 (November 3, 1931).]]
The success of the visit to Warsaw motivated the Chasidim of Riga to mobilize. “The Chasidim in Riga and in Lithuania decided to establish here in Riga a Tomchei Temimim yeshivah,” Feigin wrote. He added that this might cause the Rebbe to remain in Riga, but he remained skeptical. “I don’t see it happening, and if the financial situation would allow the Rebbe to move to Poland, he will.”[[23: It is difficult to determine the exact date that the yeshivah opened in Riga, but by the summer of 1932 it was fully operational. In a letter dated 22 Av, 5692 (August 24, 1932), Feigin tells Jacobson that the Chabad community “was moved to establish a yeshivah. Students who are from chasidic backgrounds are coming from the Lithuanian yeshivas. It is thought that if it’s successful, it might prompt the Rebbe to remain in Riga.” But the effort was short lived. On November 9, 1932 (10 Marcheshvan, 5693) the Riga Yiddish paper Evening Post reported, “The yeshivah of the Lubavitcher Rebbe is closed.” Feigin wrote to Yechezkel Zuber in December 1932, “We have given up on the yeshivah and the Rebbe is considering relocating. Many of the students were unable to receive a deferment from military service.” See Sefer HaSichos, 5692–95 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society), 3.]]
The Riga yeshivah was short lived, as students were forced to leave when they were unable to secure military exemptions. Poland emerged as the top choice for the Rebbe’s residence, and now the debate was whether he should live in bustling Warsaw or the quieter resort town of Otwock, on its outskirts, which would benefit the Rebbe’s health. In the end, the Rebbe first chose Warsaw and later relocated to Otwock.
The move was delayed to September 1933. “I decided to wait, not to make the move until I secured Latvian citizenship. Now that this has been achieved I am going to complete the plan,”[[24: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 15, letter to the Rebbe’s daughter Chaya Mushka dated 26 Sivan, 5693 ( June 20, 1933). The Rebbe left Riga, spent some of the summer at the resort in Marienbad, then went to Otwock for the holidays, and finally, moved to Warsaw after the holidays.]] the Rebbe wrote to his daughter in Paris.
The Latvian passport would later prove lifesaving when the Nazis invaded Poland. In the interim, the Rebbe would make a series of visits to Jewish communities in Poland and Lithuania.[[25: For a detailed overview of the Rebbe’s visits, see Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, chap. 9.]] Chabad Chasidim had been living in Lithuania for some time; he first visited the capital city of Vilnius in 1929, where thousands welcomed him at the train station. He met with the famed Rabbi Chaim Ozer Grodzinski, who worked with the Rebbe for many years on communal concerns. In 1931, the Rebbe toured Ludmir, Poland, and other cities in Lithuania, including Rokshitz and Glubok. He returned to Glubok a second time in June 1934 and was welcomed by thousands there, too.[[26: During the visit, Ida Haberman, then ten years old, was brought to the Rebbe at the train station by her father. Ida’s eyesight was fading, and he worried she was going blind. Though he was not a Chasid, he asked the Rebbe to bless her that she would regain her sight, and amazingly, she did. During the Holocaust, Ida was hidden by non-Jews; after the war, she immigrated to the US. Her daughter is a member of my community in Orange County, California. At the weddings of two of Ida’s grandchildren, I retold the story of the Rebbe’s remarkable miracle in her presence and noted the divine providence that a follower of the Rebbe was conducting the weddings of her grandchildren that she was able to witness decades after receiving the Rebbe’s blessing in the train station of Glubok.]] The local Yiddish paper, Gluboker Lebn, claimed that the reception given the Rebbe “surpassed” those for the presidents of Czechoslovakia and Austria. During this visit, the Rebbe navigated a local conflict over a rabbinic appointment in the city.[[27: The conflict over the appointment of a community rabbi divided the local Chasidim and Zionists. See Glenn Dynner, The Light of Learning: Hasidism in Poland on the Eve of the Holocaust (Oxford University Press, 2023), chap. 4.]]
Ultimately, it was the success of the yeshivah in Warsaw that lured the Rebbe to Poland. The Rebbe confided to the Ramash:[[28: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 15, letter dated 26 Sivan, 5693 ( June 20, 1933).]] “The spiritual state of the yeshivah in Warsaw is outstanding, and with G-d’s help there is an opportunity for the yeshivah to expand.…When I make a personal assessment, I feel a deep inner longing to be in the ohel (atmosphere) of Torah, where there are scholars full of knowledge who strive to serve with avodah (dedication to prayer and character refinement).” The Rebbe had been longing to be in such an environment for a while. During his visit in the US, he wrote in his diary, “I yearn to be in a small town, or even a larger city surrounded by Jews filled with yiras Shamayim (G-d-fearing spirit), true masters of avodah.”[[29: It is intriguing that this was written in the first weeks of the Rebbe’s visit to the US, where he had been welcomed with much hoopla. Writing in his diary on the same day, he expresses a disdain for all the fanfare: “I am weary of a life of emptiness.” Personal diary, entry dated 6 Tishrei, 5690 (October 10, 1929).]]
Finally, in September of 1933, the move to Warsaw was completed. Two years later, in 1935, the Rebbe relocated to Otwock, twenty miles south. Many leading rabbis lived in or visited Otwock, making it a spiritual hub. Rabbi Simcha Elberg recalled that there was no city in Poland that could boast “such a great number of tzaddikim.”[[30: Simcha Elberg, Varsha Shel Maalah (Bnei Brak: 1969).]] Professor Glenn Dynner writes that it had a “chasidic ambiance.”[[31: Dynner, The Light of Learning, chap. 4.]] The clearer air and more relaxed environment also benefitted the Rebbe. Yeshivah student Avraham Garfinkel says, “We heard the Rebbe was not well. Otwock was a resort town – people would come from all over the world because the air was good, and it was full of pine trees.”[[32: Interview with JEM, Oral History Project.]] Shortly afterward, the yeshivah in Warsaw followed the Rebbe there. Without the burdens of procuring a visa and incurring the cost of a journey to Riga, it was significantly easier for Polish Chasidim to make the traditional spiritual pilgrimage to the Rebbe.
But Poland presented its own unique set of challenges. As chasidic scholar Rabbi Nachum Greenwald writes,[[33: Rabbi Nachum Greenwald, Shaar HaAmerot (Machon HaRav, 5775), 2015.]] “Chabad had historically been a regional chasidic movement based in White Russia, Ukraine, and nearby cities in Lithuania. It had a collective history and culture.” Poland was different and had many established chasidic groups, Greenwald explains. “The Chabad style of dress was different than the Polish chasidic groups. The Yiddish accent was different.” On a deeper level, the mentality and outlook of the Polish Chasidim was unlike that of Chabad. Chasidism is not just a style of dress or the study of chasidic philosophy; “it’s a spiritual culture, with its own story.”
Lithuania was home to a small group of Chabad Chasidim, and in Poland the numbers were also modest; it was Russia that held the largest concentration of Chabad Chasidim. Greenwald says the Rebbe was alone, almost “like a king without a people. He had to start again anew.” In Russia, the Rebbe was the country’s foremost Jewish religious leader. In Poland, there were prominent rabbis and many well-established Jewish groups who had a major influence on communal affairs. Significantly, it was a Western country – while at times, the government was anti-Semitic, it did not repress religious beliefs. “The leadership needed in Poland was totally different than the one [needed] in Russia,” Greenwald explains. Other chasidic Rebbes had migrated from their historic homelands and were not successful in recreating their chasidic milieu in the new country. For the Rebbe to succeed in reconstituting Chabad in Poland, “it wasn’t enough to establish a yeshivah.” Rather, Greenwald says, “what was needed was to create a new generation of Chasidism from Polish students and instill in them the ethos of Chabad in the midst of Polish Jewish culture.”
Poland was not Russia, where “the Rebbe fought like a lion to keep the flame of Judaism alive. He was the head of the Jewish underground and was even jailed and sentenced to death.” He was also the recognized leader of Russian Jewry. To succeed in planting Chabad in Poland, “the Rebbe changed his leadership style.”
The religious community in Poland was highly organized. Jewish groups fielded parties in the Sejm, the Polish parliament. Orthodox Jews were split between Agudath Israel, a coalition of Chareidim,[[34: Yisrael Gutman, ed., et al., The Jews of Poland Between Two World Wars (University Press of New England, 1989), 20–35.]] and Mizrachi, the religious Zionists.[[35: Mizrachi, the religious Zionist organization, was founded in 1902 in Vilnius at a world conference of religious Zionists called by Rabbi Yitzchak Yaakov Reines. Bnei Akiva, which was founded in 1929, is the youth movement associated with Mizrachi.]] In the Polish election of 1922, Agudath Israel earned six seats, Mizrachi won five, the General Zionists, fifteen, and a combination of smaller Jewish parties won eight. Despite representation in the parliament, Jews in Poland still felt politically vulnerable and suffered from anti-Semitism.[[36: For an overview of Jewish life in the interwar years, see Celia Heller, On the Edge of Destruction (Columbia University Press, 1977).]]
The Rebbe, like his father the Rashab, refrained from joining Agudah or any of the religious parties. This was in stark contrast to the other chasidic leaders in Poland. Chasidic Rebbes, such as those of Ger,[[37: The chasidic courts of Belz and Bobov did not join Agudath Israel.]] and prominent Lithuanian yeshivah scholars were all part of this religious coalition. “Chabad is not involved in politics”[[38: In Riga, Chabad Chasid Mordechai Dubin was the head of Agudath Israel as a leader of the local Jewish community. The Rebbe himself never formally joined Agudath Israel in Latvia.]] was the Rebbe’s stance. The unwillingness of the Rebbe to encourage his followers to be active supporters of Agudath Israel created a degree of tension with other Rebbes and rabbinic scholars. They viewed Agudah as vital in representing the interests of traditional Jewry in Poland. In local communities, Agudah, Mizrachi, and other parties vied in kehillah (community) elections. Dynner writes, “The Warsaw kehillah was the de facto leader of European Jewry.” Schools, yeshivas, community organizations, and representation to the government were allied to the religious political parties. By standing outside that structure, the Rebbe did not benefit from its influence.
Polish Jewry was also undergoing major changes. In 1919, seventy-five percent of Poland’s Jews were Shabbat observant, but by the 1930s the numbers had dropped to fifty percent, though many were still very traditional. As Jews moved to the cities, they encountered varied ideas and cultures. As Professor David Biale writes, “The primary challenge for Orthodox Judaism and Chasidism in Poland was the abandonment of religion, especially by the young, who embraced secular movements such as Zionism and socialism in unprecedented numbers.”[[39: David Biale, et al., Hasidism: A New History (Princeton University Press, 2018), chap. 23.]]
Still, says Biale, “The twin traumas of World War I and interwar secularization did not paralyze Polish orthodoxy.” He explains that they “found new ways” and strategies to response to these challenges. Glenn Dynner writes that “Polish Rebbes were making monumental internal adjustments” as the traditional Orthodox community grappled with modernity. The most important response was the creation of a vibrant educational system of schools, yeshivas, and educational programs for women.[[40: Dynner, The Light of Learning, chap. 2.]]
The Rebbe took an independent leadership path in Poland. He abstained from involvement in the Jewish political parties, propagated a unique educational philosophy that focused on chasidic teachings, and was concerned for all Jews regardless of religiosity. His vision was global – he was active in efforts to assist Russian Jews and remained deeply involved with the American Jewish community. The Rebbe was engaged with Jews around the world through emissaries and constant correspondence. This created a degree of uneasiness with the established Orthodox leadership.
The seventh Rebbe compared the Rebbe’s period in Poland to the attitude of the sons of Yaakov toward their brother Yosef, as described in the Torah: “and his brothers envied him.”[[41: Yosef’s dreams caused his brothers to become jealous (Gen. 37:11). The seventh Rebbe explains that the Rebbe had three periods of leadership: The first was under the adversity of the Communist regime, the second was during his time in Riga and Poland, and the third was during the last decade of his life, in the United States. Likkutei Sichot 18:304 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society).]] While the Rebbe’s relationship with other major rabbinic leaders had a degree of tension, it was a strain between “brothers” who maintained a strong bond despite their different outlooks. The seventh Rebbe explains that divine providence caused his exile from Russia and ultimately created a new mission: to bring the teachings of Chasidism to Poland. “In Riga and Poland, he acted with self-sacrifice,”[[42: Ibid. This statement of the seventh Rebbe was quite unusual, as he would rarely speak disparagingly about others. One can speculate regarding what he means by saying that the Rebbe acted with self-sacrifice in Poland. He might be referring to the effort the Rebbe had to exert to bring the teachings and culture of Chabad to an environment that was not always welcoming.]] the seventh Rebbe said, alluding to the opposition that his father-in-law encountered from other prominent rabbinic leaders.
One of the important factors fueling these tensions was the success of the Warsaw Tomchei Temimim yeshivah and its developing network of branches. Many of its students were drawn from other chasidic groups, some even from the Lithuanian yeshivas. There were those who resented losing students to Tomchei Temimim. It was a growing, thriving educational empire. In 1930, the single branch of the yeshivah in Warsaw had a small enrollment;[[43: For a detailed list of students, including names, hometowns, and backgrounds, see Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, 126.]] its financial foundation was shaky. On the eve of the War, in 1939, the flagship yeshivah relocated from Warsaw to Otwock, and a network of ten branches spanned Poland and nearby Lithuania. Total enrollment reached 1,440 students.[[44: Otwock had the largest number at 450, with the remaining students distributed amongst the ten other branches of the yeshivah in Poland and Lithuania, including 250 in Warsaw and 150 in Lodz. The census was originally printed in HaPardes 5702 (1942), 3rd edition, 10. Reprinted in Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, 205. See chap. 17–52 of Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia for a detailed history of the yeshivah and its branches in Poland and Lithuania from 1920–39. The relocation of the yeshivah caused by the war led to new branches in Japan, China, and other European cities. For more on the yeshivah during the war years, including its reconstitution in the US and Canada, see chap. 9–10.]] In addition, many of these branches spawned Chabad chadarim, elementary-level schools, in their communities.
The Lithuanian-style yeshivas were focused on talmudic mastery, with some also including the study of musar, ethics.[[45: David E. Fishman, “The Musar Movement in Interwar Poland,” in Yisrael Gutman, Ezra Mendelsohn, Yehuda Reinharz, and Chone Shmeruk, eds., The Jews of Poland Between Two World Wars (Hanover and London: University Press of New England, 1989), 247–71.]] The Lubavitcher yeshivah was drawing students seeking the intellectual profundity of chasidic philosophy and spirituality. The Rebbe’s view was that the study of Torah should impact the individual and not just be scholarship that might prompt a sense of self-importance. “The knowledge of Torah should cause humility and good character,” the Rebbe wrote to one of his Chasidim.
In a letter[[46: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 15.]] to the Ramash, the Rebbe described diverse types of students. “There are those who study Torah and those who let Torah instruct them. There are great scholars who are consumed with their ego, feeling above criticism, in particular if it may impact their honor.” There are others who study Torah, even Chasidut, spending time contemplating those concepts and the idea of divinity, but their cold intellect does not permit it to have an impact on them. “This is a person who studies Torah, but it does not teach him.” Even though he follows the dictates of Jewish law, such a person does not truly live as a Chasid. The Rebbe aspired for a higher level for his students: “those who allow the Torah to teach them” and who enhance its study with Chasidut. On that level, the person sees his fellow as someone “whose essence is good. If he sees a negative trait in another person, it is only a reflection of his own inadequacies.” The Rebbe was referring to the principle in chasidic philosophy that each person has a divinely given soul and a spiritual core that is full of goodness and sanctity. The Rebbe’s goal was that the Yeshivah in Otwock and its network of branches would instill these principles in a new generation of Polish yeshivah students.
A crucial component of the Chabad yeshivah was its distinctive focus on prayer. The Rebbe explained, “Prayer is the tool with which we can grasp divinity, and Torah study is the tool that lets us use godliness to understand the world.”[[47: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Yehuda Leib Nemutim dated 14 Kislev, 5691 (December 4, 1930).]] This duality of focusing on both the service of prayer as a way of raising spiritual consciousness and the study of Torah to form a worldview based on Jewish values had always been central to the Chabad approach to education. This differed from the classic training of the Lithuanian-style yeshivas that dominated Poland, whose primary focus was on acquiring talmudic mastery. Even those yeshivas that had instituted classes in musar, the study of ethics and character refinement, originally championed by Rabbi Yisrael Salanter,[[48: Rabbi Yisrael Salanter (1786–1883) was a student of Rabbis Chaim Volozhin and Akiva Eiger. He instituted the study of classics such as Mesilas Yesharim.]] refrained from delving into the deep theological and philosophical issues that chasidic teachings explored. Nor did they emphasize prayer as the way to unlock a person’s inherent spiritual potential.
This unique approach attracted students from throughout the broader Orthodox community, particularly from other chasidic groups. One such student, Leibel Kramer,[[49: Dovid Zaklikowski, The People’s Rabbi: The Life and Legacy of Rabbi Leib Kramer (Brooklyn, NY: 2021).]] was the child of Gerrer Chasidim. The devotion to prayer of a Chabad Chasid in his hometown of Chelm inspired Kramer to travel to Warsaw with his friend Yitzchak Hendel[[50: Yitzchak Hendel (1916–2007) was born in Komarov, the son of Yisrael Yosef Hendel, a Chasid of the Husiatyn Rebbe. Hendel studied in Tomchei Temimim in Warsaw, Otwock, and Vilnius. He escaped Europe to Japan and Shanghai. Before the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, he traveled to Montreal as one of the nine students who established Chabad there. He was appointed the rabbi of the Chabad community in Montreal after his marriage in 1944, and went on to serve on Montreal’s rabbinical court.]] and apply to the Chabad yeshivah. With just forty spots and many more applicants, there was fierce competition. Assigned a section of Talmud to prepare, they proved their acumen and were accepted. “I was taken by the chasidic atmosphere in the yeshivah,” Kramer said. On Shabbat afternoon, “one of the students would recite a maamar, after which they would all sing beautiful chasidic melodies.” Kramer was deeply moved by the Rebbe’s prayer on Rosh HaShanah in 1931, later recalling, “On Erev Rosh HaShanah he davened for six or seven hours,”[[51: Recorded recollections of Rabbi Kramer.]] completing his prayers around midnight. Most of the students remained in the synagogue as the Rebbe prayed silently, leaning on the podium in the front of the sanctuary. “He looked like a malakh Elokim (a divine angel),” Kramer recalled with enthusiasm some sixty years later.
Tzvi Hirsch Kotlarsky enrolled in 1931. “My father and grandfather were Kotzker Chasidim, but the Kotzker Rebbe encouraged my father to have me study in Tomchei Temimim in Warsaw,”[[52: Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, 102.]] he said. The yeshivas even attracted some of the Lithuanian yeshivah elite. Rabbi Mendel Zaks, the Chafetz Chaim’s son-in-law, enrolled his son in the Chabad yeshivah in Vilnius. “I sent him there to learn about humility,” Rabbi Zaks told Chaim Meir Bukiet, who also studied there.[[53: Interview with Rabbi Chaim Meir Bukiet and students of the yeshivah of Shanghai by Rabbi Avraham Holzberg, Tishrei 5758 (September 1998).]]
Yitzchak Hendel says it was not just the study of chasidic philosophy that attracted students. “Some were drawn by the high standards of general Torah study and others by the fact that the yeshivah was well-organized and included a dorm and food service.” At the time, many yeshivas were small, mostly based in a local synagogue whose rabbi would be the primary teacher. Students had to take care of their own living arrangements and meals. Tomchei Temimim, by contrast, provided these as part of the program.
Avraham Garfinkel enrolled in 1933, encouraged by his high school principal, Rabbi Mordechai Zemel, a respected Gerrer Chasid.[[54: Kfar Chabad, issue no. 328, p. 71.]] He told Garfinkel that the yeshivah had a high level of learning. “I came for the talmudic scholarship, for the lomdut (deep analytical study).”[[55: Interview with Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak Garfinkel, JEM Oral History Project.]] Garfinkel had heard that Rabbi David Tablung taught in the yeshivah. “He was one of the greatest Jewish scholars in Warsaw, and I wanted to be in his class.”
The Rebbe’s move next to the yeshivah in Warsaw was transformational, not just for the students, but for the Rebbe himself. Just after the High Holidays of 1933, Feigin wrote,[[56: Letter to Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson dated 26 Tishrei, 5694 (October 16, 1933).]] “The Rebbe returned to his old self – he said long maamarim, some two hours in length.” A few months later, he wrote, “It is like it was in Lubavitch. The Rebbe says a maamar Friday night and then the students and anash review it during Shabbat.”[[57: Letter from Feigin dated 9 Iyar, 5694 (April 24, 1934).]] Garfinkel recalled, “How beautiful was the image of the Rebbe walking from his home to the yeshivah on Shabbat surrounded by the elders of anash, Chasidim of stature, and the students. His face was radiant and bursting with joy.”[[58: Memoirs of Avraham Garfinkel, quoted in Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, 143.]]
For the students of the yeshivah, the greatest privilege was to listen to and meet with the Rebbe. They had opportunities for yechidut, personal appointments with the Rebbe. Hendel remembers when his friend and future brother-in-law, Yosef Tenenbaum, had his first private audience with the Rebbe in Otwock. “The Rebbe spoke to him with great love. The endearment of the Rebbe to the students was palpable.”[[59: The Lives and Legacy of Zaidy and Bubby Tenenbaum (Brooklyn, NY: 2018).]] “The Rebbe was very attached to the students. He wanted to have the students around him,” says Garfinkel. The Rebbe once confided that without students, “nish kein leben” (there’s no life).
Otwock became one of Europe’s great centers of Jewish learning. Garfinkel says the students were like brothers. The yeshivah’s teachers were outstanding talmudic scholars and taught the thoughtful study of chasidic philosophy. All this attracted top students from throughout Europe.
“Those who excelled in their studies,” Tenenbaum explained, “received special privileges.” They were selected to be part of a small group of students permitted to attend the Rebbe’s recitation of a maamar on Shabbat (the Rebbe’s health prevented him from speaking to large crowds). Since the maamarim given on Shabbat could not be recorded, some students acted as chozrim, Tenenbaum among them, memorizing the Rebbe’s chasidic discourses and transcribing them later. They would review them with others, including the Rebbe himself. On holidays and the occasional Shabbat, the Rebbe would lead a farbrengen. The maamarim, filled with deep esoteric and philosophical teachings based on chasidic philosophy, the farbrengens, and the private audiences became the glue that fortified the personal relationships between the students and the Rebbe. Some remained tethered to the chasidic groups that they came from, but in many cases, the unique educational program coupled with the opportunity to interact with the Rebbe in a personal way prompted the students to become Chabad Chasidim.
Yitzchak Hendel explains that the new students from varied backgrounds “began to realize that the study of chasidic philosophy was an essential part of the curriculum. It took them some time to assimilate that fact.”[[60: Rabbi Yitzchak Hendel, family video, Los Angeles, 2006.]] When Garfinkel joined the yeshivah, “I didn’t yet know what a Rebbe is, I didn’t yet know about Lubavitch and what it meant to be a student in Lubavitch.” The turning point for him came when the Rebbe arrived in Poland in the summer of 1933. “On 12 Tamuz, the anniversary of the Rebbe’s release from Soviet prison, the Rebbe came to the yeshivah and had a farbrengen with the students. We were so excited to see the Rebbe in person.[[61: Garfinkel notes that at that time, “when the Rebbe talked, we understood everything.” In later years, after he suffered a stroke, the Rebbe’s speech was difficult to understand.]] After that I began to take a strong interest in chasidic philosophy.”
But chasidic philosophy did not appeal to all the students coming from diverse backgrounds. “Some of the students wanted to restructure the academic program by expanding the time dedicated to Talmud study and minimizing the study of chasidic philosophy,” Hendel says. This concerned the Rebbe, as he wanted the yeshivah in Poland to mirror the original Tomchei Temimim established in Lubavitch. The Rebbe felt that the way to change these students’ attitudes would be through their peers. In 1936, he invited a small group of senior students to a private meeting.[[62: Hendel, family video, 2006.]] “The Rebbe asked the students to make a special effort to instill in their classmates a stronger connection to chasidic teachings, to share with them the unique approach of Chabad that integrated the nigleh, the revealed part of the Torah (Talmud study), with the nistar, the deeper, esoteric teachings that are the core of chasidic philosophy.
During that meeting there was a moment where the Rebbe expressed his personal angst about the challenges he faced in Poland. “In Russia I experienced self-sacrifice. Now I am experiencing it again with the move from Riga to Poland.” The Rebbe did not go into detail or explain exactly what he was referring to, but the context of the conversation was the series of obstacles involved in recreating in Poland the spirit of the original Tomchei Temimim.
With time, students began to trickle in from the US too. In 1938, Berel Levy and Avraham Barnetsky enrolled, along with newly married Shlomo Zalman Hecht. The Rebbe was concerned that Americans, who were used to greater comforts, might find the more austere conditions in Poland to be challenging. But Levy felt at home, writing to his family, “We hardly felt any strangeness in our new surroundings.”[[63: Dovid Zaklikowski, Kosher Investigator (Brooklyn, NY: Hasidic Archives, 2017), “American in Poland.”]] Otwock was exciting to the young Americans. Levy describes “hundreds of students from every part of Europe and hundreds of [other] Chasidim arriving for yechidut with the Rebbe.”[[64: The Rebbe took a great personal interest in the Americans. When the administration reported to the Rebbe that Berel Levy had a library of secular English books, the Rebbe called him in for a meeting. Levy told the Rebbe, “I read them because I don’t want to forget my mother tongue, which I expect to resume speaking naturally when I return home after my studies in Otwock.” The Rebbe responded, “If they are scholarly books, it is a shad der moach (a waste of mental efforts). If they are novels, then it’s a shad de hertz (a waste of emotional efforts).” The Rebbe then suggested that Berel’s mother send him the “News in Brief” from The New York Times so that he could “read the news reports in English from there.” Ibid Zaklikowski.]] A year later, seventeen days before the war began, a group of six students arrived from the US. They were proteges of Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson in New York.
The Rebbe expanded from a single yeshivah to a network spanning the country by encouraging his students to open branches of the yeshivah throughout Poland and Lithuania. It would be the same system of spiritual entrepreneurship that would define Chabad activism in the decades ahead.
Rabbi Yosef Goldstein was one of the early students in the Warsaw yeshivah, enrolling as a sixteen-year-old in 1922. In 1931, now twenty-four and newly married, he visited the Rebbe in Riga for the High Holidays. In the midst of a farbrengen, he was surprised when the Rebbe called him up, placed his right hand on his shoulder, and urged him to open a yeshivah in Chmielnik, a town in southern Poland with a population of twelve thousand, eighty percent of whom were Jews.[[65: Interview with Yankel Goldstein, son of Yosef. Yosef Goldstein (1906–87) was sent to a concentration camp; his first wife and the rest of his family were killed by the Nazis. After the war, he remarried and immigrated to the US with the help of Rabbi Eliezer Silver in 1947. He became a shochet.]] Goldstein enlisted the help of some friends, including Rabbi Mottel Bryski, and started the yeshivah.[[66: See Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, chap. 32, for a detailed history of the yeshivah in Chmielnik.]] It grew to over seventy students, primarily from the region, and soon expanded to include an elementary-level program as well.[[67: Goldstein was fortunate to have a group of local community leaders who underwrote most of the budget. The yeshivah continued to flourish until 1939, when the Nazis invaded and killed most of the Jews of Chmielnik.]] Chaim Meir Bukiet was just eleven years old when Goldstein opened the yeshivah. “My mother walked past the yeshivah and fell in love with it,” he said.[[68: Interview for the Shoah Foundation conducted by Stella Eliezrie with Rabbi Chaim Meir Bukiet, available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eawO9ECN8j0&list=PLmtfqxE37fAB3f4cxA__idUecsPoir-fG.]] She saw that though the boys were older than her son, they were excited to learn, and she wanted me to go there.” Even though it was only for students above the age of bar mitzvah, “she worked it out with the administration, and I began studying there at eleven years old.” Chaim Meir transferred to Warsaw and then Otwock when he was sixteen.[[69: When the war broke out, Chaim Meir Bukiet escaped to Vilna and was a student in the yeshivah in Shanghai, immigrating to the US after the war. See “Our Heroes: Rabbi Chaim Meir Bukiet (1919–1998),” available at: https://crownheights.info/blogs/370015/our-heroes-rabbo-chaim-meir-bukiet-1919-1998/.]]
This process was repeated in other cities. In 1931, the Rebbe sent Rabbi Zalman Gurary, who was just nineteen, to Volhynia in Eastern Poland. He sent a letter ahead to the local Chasidim, telling them that he was sending his “outstanding student to visit the chasidic communities and synagogues, to strengthen the study of Torah, and to explore the possibility of opening a yeshivah.”[[70: Igrot Kodesh 11:148.]] Gurary reported his welcome to the Rebbe. “They all laughed, saying that there is no one to enroll and no place for a yeshivah.”[[71: BeKhol Batei Ne’eman (Kfar Chabad, Israel: Machon Razag), chap. 3.]] They told him that Novardok[[72: The Novardok yeshivas were originally started in Russia in 1896 by Rabbi Yosef Yozel Horwitz, known as the Alter (literally, “elder” rabbi). With the Russian revolution, they transferred to Poland and expanded into a network across the country. The Novardok yeshivas followed the tradition of Rabbi Yisrael Salanter, stressing the study of musar, ethics.]] had already made a failed attempt to open a yeshivah there. But Gurary persevered and was able to overcome the initial skepticism when the community understood that the goal was to create a yeshivah for local students.[[73: Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, chap. 45.]]
The Rebbe empowered his students to be his shluchim, his emissaries. They would either return to their hometowns or be dispatched to cities around Poland and Lithuania to work with the local communities to establish yeshivas. By the eve of the war, a broad system of yeshivas spanned Poland and nearby Lithuania.
The period of the yeshivah in Otwock was the golden era of Tomchei Temimim in Poland.[[74: Interview with Garfinkel, JEM Oral History Project.]] The Rebbe’s presence there made it the spiritual center of Chabad until the Nazi invasion in 1939. Tragically, many of the students lost their lives in the Holocaust. The network of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim was an incubator for a new generation of Chabad followers. Those who survived the Holocaust emerged in the postwar era as leaders of the worldwide Jewish renaissance that the Rebbe initiated and the seventh Rebbe later expanded.
When the Rebbe relocated to Warsaw in 1933, eighteen-year-old Moshe Gerlitzky was given the task of unpacking the Rebbe’s library with a few friends. The extensive collection had been shipped from Riga in twelve large crates. The Rebbe directed Gerlitzky to handle the books with care as they were unpacked and placed in bookshelves.[[75: Dovid Zaklikowski, The Atvotzkers, available at: https://files.anash.org/uploads/2021/01/The-Atvotzkers.pdf.]] “The students did their work, studiously refraining from looking into the books, some of which were original manuscripts and priceless first editions,” writes chasidic historian Dovid Zaklikowski.[[76: Ibid.]] At one point, the students discovered a booklet of private correspondence from the Gerrer Rebbe, the Sfas Emes (Rabbi Yehuda Leib Alter, 1847–1905) addressed to the Rebbe Rashab. The Gerrer Rebbe was the leader of the largest chasidic group in Poland. Their curiosity was piqued, says Gerlitzky. “Nu, as young Polish lads, we wanted to see at least something from there.” As they crowded around to peek, the Rebbe himself walked in and caught them in the act. “We almost fainted,” Gerlitzky remembers. The Rebbe smiled, telling them, “Just don’t look into it.”
The Rebbe had been an avid bibliophile from a young age, creating his own personal library. As he wrote[[77: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 11, letter dated April 29, 1930 (1 Iyar, 5690). The letter was written during the Rebbe’s visit to Detroit and refers to a meeting that took place when the Rebbe was in New York earlier that year.]] to Peter (Peretz) Wiernik,[[78: Peter Wiernik (1865–1936) was born in Vilna and immigrated to the US in 1885. He settled in Chicago, where he wrote for the Yiddish Chicago Daily Courier. From 1901 to 1936, he was the editor of New York’s important Yiddish-language daily, The Jewish Morning Journal, a Modern Orthodox, pro-Zionist newspaper. Wiernik is the author of The History of the Jews in America (1931, reprinted in 1972 by Herman Press).]] editor of New York’s Morning Journal, “As I told you, my dear friend, I am a collector of books.” The Rebbe requested copies of Wiernik’s works, which included a Jewish history of the US. “I would like to enrich my library with your publications.” In 1904, at the age of twenty-four, the Rebbe wrote to Rabbi Yaakov Yosef Slonim, a distant relative in Jerusalem, in his pursuit of antiquarian books.[[79: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter dated 15 Tamuz, 5664 ( June 28, 1904).]] He asked him to search for unique collector’s volumes in Jerusalem, specifically early edition books. Five months later, he offered to pay Rabbi Slonim’s travel expenses to the northern town of Safed for the purpose of searching for historic books and manuscripts. “It may be possible to find books and antique manuscripts from well-known scholars.” He asked him to “be sensitive to the price because my budget is still limited.” The Rebbe also requested that Slonim search genizah, storage rooms for discarded holy books (because Jewish law prohibits their destruction), in historic Hebron and Jerusalem. He wished to procure manuscripts from chasidic masters, particularly the Mitteler Rebbe,[[80: Rabbi Dovber (1773–1827) was the second Chabad-Lubavitch Rebbe, succeeding his father Rabbi Schneur Zalman in 1812. He is called the Mitteler Rebbe (“the Middle Rebbe”) as the Rebbe in between the Chabad founder and Rabbi Menachem Mendel, the third Rebbe. He was the first Rebbe to live in the town of Lubavitch. Chabad Chasidim who immigrated to Eretz Yisrael began moving to Hebron as early as 1816 upon the encouragement of the Mitteler Rebbe. He raised funds in Russia to purchase a synagogue in Hebron. The Mitteler Rebbe’s daughter, Menucha Rochel, moved to Hebron with her family in 1845.]] and thought that Chabad Chasidim who had emigrated from Russia a century earlier could have brought such manuscripts with them. “This is a top priority.”[[81: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter dated 10 Kislev, 5665 (November 18, 1904).]]
When the Rebbe evacuated Lubavitch in 1915, he combined his personal collection with that of his father, and the bulk of it was placed in storage in Moscow. They retained some priceless manuscripts, including valuable chasidic writings dating back centuries, and a select number of books, taking them to Rostov. With the fall of the czarist government, the books stored in Moscow were seized and eventually transferred to the Russian National Library in 1924. Even before the passing of his father, the Rebbe Rashab, in 1920, the Rayatz began the effort to have the library returned. Authorities agreed to repatriate the library but then reneged, first in 1921[[82: “In 1921, the Department of State Libraries under the auspices of the People’s Committee of Education issued a resolution approving the return of the books to me.” Letter in Russian from the Rebbe to the director of the Rumyantsev Museum, November 22, 1922, Archives of Chabad of California.]] and again in 1925.[[83: The library reneged on the agreement due to the intervention of Shmuel Eizenstat, a librarian in the Moscow library who objected to the Rebbe’s views on Zionism. See Igrot Kodesh 11:82, where the Rebbe writes, “It was an act of personal retribution because the historic stand of the Lubavitcher Rebbes on Zionism was known.” Sifriyat Lubavitch, Rabbi Berel Levin (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication), 84–85.]] The Rebbe made repeated attempts to have the library returned while he was living in Russia, Latvia, Poland, and the US. While in Riga, the Rebbe approached the Russian ambassador to Latvia with a request for his help in returning the library.[[84: Igrot Kodesh 16:98, letter to the Russian Ambassador to Latvia (translated into Hebrew), dated October 27, 1927.]] He also encouraged the Ramash, who was studying in Berlin, to lobby the German government for its help. “It is causing me great anguish that the library is being held in Moscow,” the Rebbe wrote. He felt it was a tragedy “that the books that the holy Rebbes studied and wrote annotations in should be imprisoned.”[[85: In the same letter, the Rebbe mentions that “due to communal concerns, I held back from pressing the issue,” alluding to the priority he gave to lobbying Western governments to alleviate the suffering of Russian Jews after he exited Russia. However, in this letter written in early 1932, he writes, “Now I have resolved to make a major effort on this.” Igrot Kodesh, vol. 15, letter to the Ramash dated 11 Shevat, 5693 ( January 19, 1932).]] The Rebbe looked for every opportunity to pressure the Russians to release the library. He never gave up hope that it would be returned to him. The seventh Rebbe continued the effort after the Rebbe’s passing. As the Soviet Union weakened, he established a committee of prominent Chasidim to work on securing the return of the library.[[86: As the Soviet Union weakened in 1988, the seventh Rebbe sent his secretary Dr. Nissan Mindel and the library’s director Rabbi Berel Levin to Russia to search for the historic collection. With time, he appointed a committee comprised of Levin and three distinguished shluchim, Rabbis Shlomo Cunin of California, Yitzchak Kogan of Moscow, and Yosef Aronoff of Israel, to redeem the library on behalf of its legal owner, Agudas Chassidei Chabad, based in New York. To quell the controversy, the Russian National Library opened an official branch in the Jewish Museum of Moscow, where it placed a selection of the books. This was unacceptable to Agudas Chassidei Chabad, and it demanded the library be returned to its rightful owners, the historic Chabad library, located in Brooklyn. As Russia became more recalcitrant, the issue moved into federal court, where sanctions were imposed on Russia. For a detailed overview of the efforts to free the library, see Sifriyat Lubavitch, chap. 12; Graham Bowley, “Russia Fined $44 Million for Refusing to Hand Over Jewish Books,” available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/12/books/russia-fined-44-million-for-refusing-to-hand-over-jewish-books.html.]]
The historic library in the town of Lubavitch had been reserved for the use of the Rebbes and a few select scholars. While still in Russia the Rebbe began a new initiative to increase the collection. In 1925, he acquired a large private collection[[87: The Rebbe purchased this collection from Shmuel Weiner, who had a large personal collection and was librarian of the Asiatic Museum of the Imperial Academy of Sciences. He wanted to emigrate from Russia, and the Communist government refused to grant him permission to take his collection with him. Having no choice, he parted with his valuable collection for just five thousand dollars. In this way, the Rebbe acquired a very valuable collection at low cost; he made payments over time.]] comprised of some five thousand items including valuable, rare, and antique volumes. Ironically, the new Bolshevik government helped expand the library. During the czar’s rule they had seized two copies of every book. “There were millions of books. During the first years of the Communist regime, they needed money, but they didn’t need Yiddish ( Jewish) books, so they sold many of them off for use as paper. I was able to procure many,”[[88: Testimony, Chaim Lieberman, book trial transcript, p. 1,262.]] Rabbi Chaim Lieberman recalled. In 1927, when the Rebbe left Russia, he took the library with him to Latvia, overcoming the Russian government’s opposition.[[89: The government sent an investigator who understood the value of Jewish books and historical manuscripts. He urged the government to block the export of the library. Mordechai Dubin was able to arrange a second investigator who lacked knowledge of Jewish books and authorized the license for export. Likkutei Dibburim 6:237.]]
In Riga, a broader vision began to develop – the idea of creating a formal world-class library. Rabbi Lieberman, who was appointed the librarian, said the process began in the summer of 1928. “There were enough books for the Rebbe’s personal use,” but the Rebbe had a bigger idea. “He wanted to create a public library, not for lending but for research, like the British Museum that is open to scholars.” This was an ambitious project. “Thousands of books were needed, and we weren’t sure if we could find the finances to acquire them.” He explained that in the town of Lubavitch the Rebbe’s library had been simply stored on some shelves in the Rebbe’s home. But this undertaking would necessitate a suitable facility, with an area for researchers and a proper catalogue. The Rebbe told Lieberman, “Let’s try. We will advance this project over a period of a few years, adding more books every year.”[[90: Testimony, Lieberman, p. 1,262.]]
The Rebbe cast a wide net in his quest to develop a world-class research library. In letters to Chasidim around the world, he urged them to source books in their home countries. The Rebbe even included secular publications, calling them “the left side of the library.”[[91: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Dovid Frankel dated 17 Iyar, 5688 (May 7, 1928).]] He sought all books published in Hebrew and also stocked selections in other languages of Jewish importance.[[92: The library even included publications from the Yevesektzia that were very anti-religious. Librarian Berel Levin explains that this was done “so people would know how to respond” to these types of allegations. The Rebbe also asked one of his followers in Eretz Yisrael to gather calendars and other materials published by institutions in the country. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Chanoch Hendel Havlin dated 16 Iyar, 5688 (May 16, 1928).]] The Rebbe even requested “names of book sellers in Yemen, Australia, Africa, France, and Italy.”[[93: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Dovid Frankel dated 17 Iyar, 5688 (May 7, 1928).]]
In his drive to expand the collection, the Rebbe and his librarian Chaim Lieberman requested that authors and publishing houses donate a copy of their publications to the library. In 1934, Lieberman turned to Rabbi David Solomon Sassoon in London, requesting a donation of his book Ohel David. “Many authors send their publications to us as a gift.” Lieberman also placed advertisements in prominent Jewish publications requesting that authors gift their works to the Bibliothek Lybubawithc. Feigin asked Rabbi Eliyahu Simpson in New York to spread the word that “the Rebbe would be very happy to receive books from authors as a token for the library.”[[94: Letter from Feigin to Simpson dated 21 Av, 5696 (August 9, 1936). See Ibid Levin, Sifriyas, 107.]] A month later, the Rebbe thanked Simpson for books he had sent, writing, “I am interested in books published from the earliest Hebrew publishing in America,” noting that this included books from the pre-revolutionary period.[[95: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 3, letter to Rabbi Eliyahu Simpson dated 11 Av, 5696 ( July 30, 1936).]] Feigin asked Shanghai’s Chief Rabbi Meir Ashkenazi to look into whether there were historical Jewish books in “Japan, China, and other remote countries.”[[96: Letter from Feigin to Ashkenazi dated 28 Nisan, 5693 (April 24, 1933). Rabbi Meir Ashkenazi (1891–1954) was a student of the yeshivah in Lubavitch. He was a prominent scholar, first serving as a rabbi in Vladivostok before becoming chief rabbi of Shanghai, with the Rebbe’s encouragement. During the war, he saved many refugees. Afterward, he immigrated to the US.]]
Year after year, the Rebbe’s library continued to grow from purchases, gifts from authors and publishers, and donations from Chasidim around the world. By 1928 it had already made a name for itself. The London Jewish newspaper HaOlam reported,[[97: HaOlam, 22 Elul, 5688/September 7, 1928.]] “It is a treasure of Jewish artifacts,” noting that the collection included “one of the oldest siddurim ever printed, from the year 1475, [and] 950 Haggadahs translated from many languages from across the world” as well as “the siddur of the Baal Shem Tov.” The paper heralded the library as “an important source for research.”
The Rebbe wrote to the Ramash enthusiastically about the library’s progress.[[98: Igrot Kodesh 16:143.]] “In the span of one month, two hundred publications were added.” He said that Lieberman was “happy” with this development and was in the process of creating a catalog. The library had three sections: one, “sacred,” referring to Torah volumes; a second, “secular,” referring to Hebrew-language publications that were not necessarily religious in nature; and third, “foreign languages.” The Rebbe hoped the catalog would be completed soon and translated into various languages. “Then we will know what we have and what we lack.”
When the Rebbe fled to America at the onset of the war, he tried to secure the transfer of the library to the United States as well. The majority of the collection arrived in 1941 via Stockholm. Some of the collection became lost during the war, eventually being placed in the Polish National Library. It was discovered in 1983,[[99: Microfilm copies of the Polish Library collection were discovered in Canada in 1983. This led to a investigation that revealed their whereabouts. Two years later, a Canadian student visiting the library in Warsaw was given an actual manuscript of the Rebbe’s; it eventually reached the hands of Chabad rabbis in Toronto. This sparked an initiative to repatriate the library. After a major diplomatic effort, the collection was returned to Chabad in 1988. See “Rescue of the Library,” available at: https://derher.org/wp-content/uploads/17-adar-2-5774-04.pdf.]] and five years later, it was repatriated to the Chabad Library in New York.
The Rebbe’s library, inaugurated in Russia and nurtured in Latvia and Poland, ultimately blossomed into one of the largest Jewish libraries in the world. Today it is located in a large facility adjacent to Lubavitch World Headquarters in Brooklyn and is open daily for research. Its exhibition hall features historic publications, artifacts, and manuscripts.[[100: Rabbi Shalom Dovber Levine, “The Library Exhibitions: The 15 Exhibitions Held at the Library’s Exhibition Hall, 1994–2025,” available at: http://s3.wasabisys.com/chabadlibrary/pdf/EXHIBITIONS-E.pdf.]] The collection boasts close to 300,000 items, with more than three thousand manuscripts, including great treasures like the siddur used by Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov, marked with his personal notations.[[101: In 2020, Kehot Publication Society published Treasures from the Chabad Library, a 564-page book on the special collections of the library, authored by Rabbi Shalom Dovber Levine. See Menachem Posner, “11 Treasures of the Chabad Library and the Stories They Tell,” available at: chabad.org/4601125.]] Its online catalog is translated into five languages.[[102: Available at: https://www.chabadlibrary.org/.]]
But the Rebbe’s greatest priority was the fate of Russian Jewry. He started organizing support for them from the communities in Poland during his visits there before he made the actual move in 1933. As he had in Riga, he established a committee of community leaders and prominent rabbis to raise funds and awareness.
Soviet agriculture was disrupted by collectivization and other factors, prompting shortfalls in food production. Between 1931 and 1933, some six million Russians died of starvation. As historian Nora Levin writes, “The famine of the winter of 1932–33 affected especially southern Ukraine, where many Jewish colonists perished.”[[103: Nora Levin, The Jews in the Soviet Union Since 1917, vol. 1 (New York University Press, 1987), chap. 10.]] Writer Boris Pasternak visited the colonies and described “inhuman, unimaginable misery.”
During this time, the Russian government intensified its anti-religious campaign, says Professor David Fishman. “The situation took a dramatic turn for the worse in the early months of 1930.”[[104: David Fishman, “The Fate of Religious Education,” in Yaacov Ro’i, ed., Jews and Jewish Life in the Russia and the Soviet Union (Ilford England: Frank Cass & Co.).]] The government was targeting religious functionaries. “Numerous practicing rabbis were stripped of their civil rights and branded lishentsy, disenfranchised people). Homes were confiscated and “rabbis were levied with excessive taxes, which forced them to sell their personal belongings, or face arrest and deportation.” The rabbinate, which had until then continued to function to a degree, faced disintegration. No longer was the Committee of Rabbis established by the Rebbe after the rise of Communism able to distribute funds in Russia for religious education. The rabbis themselves were barely surviving, at times leaving their hometowns to escape harassment.
In 1930, eleven rabbis from Leningrad were arrested, including the head of the community, Rabbi Shimon Lazaroff.[[105: Some of Rabbi Lazaroff’s children survived, and today many of his descendants are Chabad shluchim. His grandson and namesake is the head of Chabad in Texas.]] Secret police files uncovered by Russian historian Irina Osipova[[106: Irina Osipova, Hasidim – Saving Thy People: The Resistance of Hasidic Jews to Soviet Oppression During the Stalin Era, trans. Malcolm Gilbert, chap. 3. There were numerous other arrests throughout Russia during this period. Osipova describes them in detail using information gleaned from files of the KGB that have come to light in the post-Soviet era.]] reveal that the indictment was because he was “the head of the religious association Tzemach Tzedek, organizing unlawful yeshivas and chadarim for which he received money from foreign capitalists.” Rabbi Lazaroff was sentenced to ten years and died in 1933 in a prison camp. There were more arrests throughout Russia. Despite this constant harassment by the government, the underground educational system had remarkable resilience. When a yeshivah was closed in one town, it would pop up in another.
After the Rebbe’s departure from Russia, his secretary Rabbi Elchonon Morozov coordinated the network. Wanted by the secret police, he evaded capture by acquiring false papers in 1931. For almost a decade, he found sanctuary in the home of Raskin family in Leningrad. Sara Raskin, who was a child at the time, recalls, “Rabbi Elchonon came to live with us, and our apartment was transformed into a veritable headquarters. Through him, the Rebbe maintained contact with Chasidim inside Russia.”[[107: Due to the secrecy involved, there are sparse details on how the Rebbe communicated with and transferred funds to Rabbi Morozov and other activists in Russia.]] Raskin remembers that Rabbi Morozov would say, “While there are yeshivas, our flag will not be lowered even in the hardest times.”[[108: Osipova, ibid.]]
In 1930, the Russian government dismantled the Yevesektzia,[[109: Richard Pipes, Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime (Vintage Books, 1995). For details on the Yevesektzia’s closure, see Zvi Gitelman, Jewish Nationality and Soviet Politics, 472–81. The Soviets had also supported the creation of an alternative leadership for the Russian Orthodox church that was loyal to Communism. Once the church was weakened, the pro-Communist church group was dismantled.]] as the Rebbe Rashab had foreseen.[[110: See chap. 3.]] Until this point, the Rebbe and the Committee of Rabbis had been able to play government officials against the Yevesektzia, arguing, many times successfully,[[111: Throughout the 1920s, there had been ambiguity and at times tension between government policies and the zealousness of the Yevesektzia. The Rebbe had exploited this in many cities, prompting government officials to intervene to restrain the activists of the Yevesektzia. With the closure of the Yevesektzia, government restraint ended. As Fishman writes, “In 1930, it became painfully evident that the anti-religious persecution emanated from the state and not renegade Jewish Communists.” Jack Wertheimer, ed. The Uses of Tradition (New York: Jewish Theological Seminary, 1992), 116.]] that religion was permitted in Russia and the Yevesektzia was overly zealous. After its closure, the state itself pursued the policy of suppressing religion, Judaism as well as other faiths. In the purges of the 1930s, Stalin’s regime turned on many of its own activists, including Yevesektzia leader Semyon Dimenstein, who was killed by the Soviets in 1938. Editors of the Yevesektzia paper Der Emes were targeted; Moshe Litvakov was executed in 1937 and Esther Frumkin was arrested a year later. She died in a prison camp in Kazakhstan.[[112: In addition to working as editors of the Yevesektzia newspaper Der Emes, Litvakov and Frumkin together translated Lenin’s works into an eight-volume Yiddish publication.]]
Jews who resisted moving their farms from private ownership to Communist-run collectives, and those who refused to buckle to anti-religious oppression, suffered greatly. They had difficulties finding employment, made worse when it came to Shabbat observance. The poverty in the rural areas continued to be a catalyst for Jews moving to urban areas. Religious Jews in particular gravitated to larger cities, where their lifestyle and dress did not draw as much attention as it did in smaller towns.
The bleak news emanating from Russia aggrieved the Rebbe. Feigin wrote[[113: Letter to Jacobson dated 24 Tevet, 5693 ( January 24, 1933).]] of the Rebbe’s emotional state, “What gives him no peace are the reports from expulsions in Moscow, Leningrad, and Kharkiv.” The Rebbe’s spirit was broken, he said, as “the situation in Russia affects the essence of his soul.”
New legislation introduced in Russia in 1929 created another major economic stumbling block for Shabbat-observant Jews. If they were not officially employed, they were liable to pay five to ten times as much for rent. The law targeted clergy of all religions, curbing their ability to serve congregations in Russia. Reports of growing hunger and food shortages trickled out from Russia, alarming the Rebbe. He attempted to arrange food shipments, such as had been done in 1929 when he sent matzah for Passover. But this time the Russians would not authorize large, organized shipments.
The intensified oppression weakened the Rebbe’s network in Russia. Still, the underground built on the self-sacrifice of the Rebbe’s Chasidim was resilient and continued to operate clandestinely.[[114: Fishman argues in Wertheimer, ed. The Uses of Tradition, that after 1930, “the struggle to preserve tradition in the USSR ultimately failed.” But the fact that one thousand Chasidim exited Russia twenty-six years later in the Great Escape disproves this assertion, as it shows that secret yeshivas and synagogues continued to operate until the fall of the Soviet Union, then emerging to spark a renaissance of Judaism.]] During the 1930s, yeshivas opened and closed in a variety of cities, including Kyiv, Zhytomyr, Chernihiv, Machovka, Novikov, and Kursk. For a while, there was a yeshivah in Kutaisi in Soviet Georgia, which was distant from Moscow and subject to less intense scrutiny.[[115: For a detailed overview on the yeshivas in the 1930s, see Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 72.]] After the war, yeshivas opened in Uzbekistan. Despite harassment from the secret police, and despite the expulsions and murder of rabbis, the secret system set up by the Rebbe starting in 1920 operated in the Soviet Union until its collapse.
Faced with fresh challenges, the Rebbe created a new strategy, writing to Peter Wiernik in New York, “According to reports we are receiving from there [the Soviet Union], their situation is severe and they are hungry for bread.”[[116: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 11, letter to Peter Wiernik dated 29 Tevet, 5691 ( January 18, 1931).]] He proposed that packages with food and clothing be sent directly to Jews in Russia, “as if from one relative to another.” The Rebbe explained that observant Jews did not work on Shabbat and were therefore not entitled to ration cards, but even if they had received bread via ration cards, “they were lacking many other staples such as sugar.” The Rebbe’s plan was to create a network of Jews in Europe, the US, and other countries who would send packages on a regular basis to individuals in Russia. Their “relatives” from overseas would help those who were suffering. This campaign operated covertly, as exposure could cause the Soviets to block the shipments. As the Rebbe wrote to one of his followers, “the fundraising could not be done publicly.”
The Rebbe’s son-in-law, the Rashag, took the lead on this project, contacting Jewish communities around the world to ensure that it appeared to be a grassroots effort. “The Rebbe feels it imperative to inspire Jews to send packages to their brothers in Russia,” he wrote to Rabbi Yehuda Leib Horowitz, one of the Chabad leaders in Boston in 1931.[[117: Harif, letter dated 20 Sivan, 5691 ( June 5, 1931), 148.]] “This will keep people alive,” he emphasized. The crisis was more acute for observant Jews, “who are not members of the Workers’ Party and do not have the right to get food from government stores.” He appealed to Jewish leaders as far as Cape Town. “The Rebbe has ascertained that the best way to help our fellow Jews in Russia is by sending food packages via the postal service.” He asked that a campaign be organized in South Africa to support the effort. Jews could send packages directly from South Africa or they could sponsor packages being sent from Riga. “I am sending you a list of packages that can be sent from here in Riga, which is close to your friends and relatives in Russia.”
While in Paris for medical care, the Rebbe also organized a committee to spearhead a similar effort based in France. Local Jewish leaders including prominent rabbis such as Rabbi Moshe Eisenstadt worked with the Rashag, also placing ads in newspapers in Eretz Yisrael so families there could sponsor packages for their loved ones.[[118: Shmuel Menachem Mendel Butman, The Rebbe in Paris (Chazak Publishing, 2024), chap. 1; Igrot Kodesh 11:378, letter to chief rabbi of Paris; Igrot Kodesh 11:380, letter to Menachem Rothstein. These letters do not have exact dates, but they seem to have been written while the Rebbe was in Paris in 1933–34.]] The Rebbe also appealed to the JDC and other Jewish organizations to sponsor shipments, telling JDC officials that the rabbis being oppressed by the Communists were “on the verge of expiring from hunger.”[[119: The JDC did subsidize some of the shipments. Igrot Kodesh 17:80, letter to Aharon Teitelbaum dated late winter 5693 (1933–34).]]
And it was not only packages. With the help of the Rashag, the Rebbe arranged the direct transfer of funds to Jews in Russia. Money sent to Soviet citizens from overseas could only be exchanged at official rates. Desperately needing foreign currency, the Russians kept the exchange rate artificially low. Russia and nearby Latvia were strong trading partners, so the Rashag worked with businessmen in Riga who operated in Russia. He provided the Latvians with US dollars or other currencies, and through associates in Russia, they converted the funds to rubles and transferred them to needy Jews. As he explained to Rabbi Yitzchak Horowitz in Boston, if the money was sent through official means like the post or a bank transfer, the addressee would get less than two rubles per dollar. But “if we send the funds in an illegal fashion, they get five rubles. I have done this successfully many times, to all parts of Russia.” Discovery by the Soviets could result in imprisonment for the Jews in Russia, but the threat of starvation outweighed the risks. Quietly, word went out to Jews around the world that there was a way to move funds to friends and relatives in Russia.
Within a few years, the operation had grown so much that four Russian refugee Chasidim were busy full-time running an office in Riga that took orders from Jews around the world and dispatched packages to Russia. The four Chasidim, Rabbis Moshe Gurary, his brother Shmaryahu (Shmerel), Dovber Chaskind, and Yosef Rosenblum, were alumni of the yeshivas in Lubavitch and Kremenchuk. As Russians themselves, they understood the difficulties faced by those still in the country and were devoted to the mission entrusted to them by the Rebbe.
One late night in November of 1935, Latvian police raided all four of their homes simultaneously.[[120: It is not known who was behind the arrest – the Latvians themselves, concerned with the suspicious activity, or the Russian government, which had perhaps gotten wind of the project.]] Shmerel Gurary’s daughter, who was just seven years old at the time, remembered the police search many years later. “They didn’t permit us to move,” she said. “I stood in the house wondering what they were looking for.” All four were hauled off to jail; with great difficulty, they were released on bail. As Russian citizens – not Latvians – their legal predicament was dangerous. Finally, authorities gave them a choice: a long prison sentence or expulsion from Latvia. The Rebbe advised them to immigrate to British Mandate Palestine.[[121: At the time, the Rashag was in Eretz Yisrael. With the help of Agudath Israel and Israel’s Chief Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak Kook, immigration certificates were issued, and the four Chasidim left Latvia with their families.]] In Tel Aviv they recreated the operation, continuing to ship packages to Russia, and eventually opening branches in Petach Tikvah, Haifa, and with time, New York.[[122: Dovber Chaskind and the two Gurary brothers were joined by their brother-in-law Eliezer Karasik. They advertised in newspapers in Eretz Yisrael that they could arrange shipments of food to Russia. Chaskind eventually immigrated to the US, where he set up a similar operation, sending packages from New York.]]
Since the Bolshevik revolution in 1917, the US had refused to recognize the new regime in Russia. In 1933, the newly elected Franklin Roosevelt was determined to change that policy. US recognition was important to Russia, and so Russian Foreign Minister Maxim Litvinov traveled to Washington to personally negotiate with US officials.[[123: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 42.]] As with so many other Communist officials, Litvinov was Jewish, born as Meir Finkelstein in 1876 in Bialystok, Russia.[[124: Maxim Litvinov (1876–1951) joined the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party in 1898. He fled Russia in 1906 when the Russian government began arresting Bolsheviks, spending time overseas as an arms dealer for the revolution. In 1917, Lenin appointed him the Soviet representative to London, and in 1930, Stalin appointed Litvinov as People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs. He negotiated US recognition with the new Roosevelt government in 1933. During World War II, he served as Soviet ambassador to the US. See “Maxim M. Litvinov, Russian Commissar of Foreign Affairs arrives in United States,” video clip available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVUEKDX0WX0.]]
The Rebbe viewed this as a historic opportunity. He launched a global campaign to pressure the US to make the religious freedom of Russian Jews a perquisite for formal diplomatic recognition. The campaign was broad, galvanizing international Jewish leaders to appeal[[125: The Rebbe drafted a letter with seven demands: not to close religious schools, to permit Hebrew instruction, to allow immigration for rabbis, to allow ration cards for rabbis and teachers, not to close synagogues and study halls, not to prohibit kosher slaughter, and not to ban ritual circumcision. Igrot Kodesh 3:62, footnote.]] to Litvinov on behalf of world Jewry. It included leaders from across the spectrum, from prominent European rabbis such as Chaim Ozer Grodzinksi[[126: Some of the others included were Yaakov Rosenheim and Y. M. Levin of Agudath Israel, Rabbi Alter from Agudas Harabonim, and Professor Shur on behalf of Liberal Jewish leaders.]] to the head of the Jewish Agency, Nahum Sokolow. The Rebbe turned to prominent US Jews, including Rabbi Eliezer Silver, leaders of the JDC, and others, urging them to use their connections to US officials. “The representative of the Soviet Union is coming to the US to establish formal relations,” he wrote. “It’s important to use this moment to benefit Russian Jews.”[[127: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 3, letter to Menachem Mendel Lokshin dated 5 Cheshvan, 5694 (October 24, 1933). The Rebbe writes there that he is enclosing letters to be forwarded to leading American rabbis, including Rabbi Eliezer Silver. “I am asking you to act expeditiously and push the Agudas Harabonim to the task, to prepare for when the Soviet representatives are coming to Washington.” See also Igrot Kodesh 11:205.]] The Rebbe also reached out to his contacts in the US government, including US Senators William Borah of Idaho and William King of Utah.[[128: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 3, letter to Rabbi Chaim Ozer dated 4 Tevet, 5694 (December 22, 1933). He writes, “I am enclosing copies of the letters for Senators Borah and King, Congressman Dickstein, and Professor Cyrus Adler.”]] He encouraged them to intervene with the Roosevelt administration to condition the recognition of the Soviet Union on lifting the restrictions on religious life in Russia.
Following his approach of many years, the Rebbe worked quietly behind the scenes.[[129: Igrot Kodesh 11:405, letter to Agudas Harabonim, Rabbis Teitelbaum, Silver, Rosenberg, Lokshin, Kramer, Telushkin, dated 5 Cheshvan, 5644 (October 24, 1933). The Rebbe wrote that there were unusual circumstances when public protest could help, referring to an incident in 1929 when he wrote: “For instance, when the Rabbis were imprisoned in Minsk and protests overseas brought about their release.”]] “In my experience in years of efforts in Russia, both when I was there and after I departed, much more can be accomplished by secret diplomacy than demonstrations.”[[130: In general, the policy of the Rebbe and his successor the seventh Rebbe was one of quiet diplomacy with regard to the Soviet Union. This policy of secrecy that they practiced makes it difficult for us to learn about many of the initiatives to help Russian Jews throughout the decades. The seventh Rebbe would discuss ideas for operations in the Soviet Union only in face-to-face private meetings with the principals involved. His own secretaries were not aware of much of the activity he orchestrated behind the Iron Curtain.]] The Rebbe added, “Having influential people lobbying can be very effective.” Still, word leaked to the press, and a London Jewish paper[[131: HaOlam, London, January 18, 1934.]] reported on the letter from world Jewry requesting that the “Soviet Union cease its policy of closing synagogues, allow Jewish schools to operate, and permit Russian rabbis to emigrate.”
Unfortunately, the US government, eager to strike a deal with Russia, did not acquiesce to the Rebbe’s requests. The Russians agreed to one concession: US citizens visiting Russia would be free to practice their religion as they pleased.[[132: “Recognition of the Soviet Union, 1933,” Office of the Historian, available at: https://history.state.gov/milestones/1921-1936/ussr.]] There was one more concrete achievement with Litvinov. Twenty-three Chabad Chasidim, caught secretly crossing Russia’s southern border on their way to Eretz Yisrael, had been arrested and sentenced to labor camps. Reb Itche der Masmid was in the US on behalf of the Rebbe and lobbied Litvinov for their release. The two met in Washington, and as a result, the Russian government freed the group from prison, though they were not permitted to emigrate.[[133: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 113.]]
As the Rebbe was marshaling the support of world leaders to lobby US government officials for religious freedom in Russia, he created a separate parallel push to repatriate the Chabad library. He turned to some key US Chasidim to request that the US government urge Litvinov to return the library. Rabbi Avraham Axelrod from Baltimore reached out to the secretary of state. It was a much more subtle effort and clearly calculated not to undermine the more important initiative to relieve the suffering of Russian Jews.[[134: It can be argued that the Rebbe took different strategies in regard to the issues of returning his library and religious freedom for Russian Jews, using different channels for each one. When it came to the question of religious freedom in Russia, he urged major Jewish organizations and prominent international Jewish leaders to intervene with the US government to get the issue onto the agenda in the Russian negotiations for US diplomatic recognition. The issue even received some press attention. In the case of the library, the Rebbe operated more discretely, asking Rabbi Axelrod, a Chabad follower in Baltimore, to approach the State Department personally. Perhaps the Rebbe feared that if the matter of the library would have been presented along with the question of religious freedom, the US government would advocate for the library’s return instead of giving attention to the issue of religious freedom.]] Ultimately, this initiative failed. Under Secretary of State William Phillips wrote to Axelrod, “Rabbi Schneersohn is not a citizen of the United States and this government is not in a position to take any formal steps to induce the Soviet government to return the books.”[[135: Levin, Sifriyas Lubavitch, letter dated December 19, 1933, p. 87.]]
Aside from his work on behalf of Russian Jews, the Rebbe continued to reach out to communities across the globe during the 1930s. Many Jews had emigrated from the chasidic heartland in Russia to new communities around the world. Some were ardent Chasidim; others merely had a nostalgic connection to Chabad. With those the Rebbe knew personally, he kept a correspondence, sending letters, maamarim, and likkutei dibburim (published talks and chasidic lore). Many of those immigrants arrived in locations where religious life was just setting down roots. As time went on, their connection to Chabad and observance in general weakened. In America, Agudas Chassidei Chabad was established in 1924, but in other countries, Chabad was not formalized. In some regions, the Rebbe’s Chasidim were community rabbis. He encouraged them to expand their vision, to take responsibility for all Jews, and to reach out to those on the periphery of the Jewish community. He praised Rabbi Meir Ashkenazi in Shanghai, “I received great pleasure that you have initiated educational classes for the public.” Ashkenazi had previously reported to the Rebbe that the Ashkenazi and Sephardi communities in Shanghai operated independently. The Rebbe urged him to bridge those gaps. “When it comes to bolstering Jewish life, it is preferable to unify.”[[136: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 11, letter dated 7 Cheshvan 5699 (November 1, 1938).]] The Rebbe told Rabbi Yisrael Zuber in Stockholm,[[137: Rabbi Yisrael Zuber (1896–1953) studied in Lubavitch. He was a rabbi in Stockholm and immigrated to the US after the war, where he was appointed as a rabbi in Boston. Tragically, he was killed in December 1953. Rabbi Zuber assisted the Rebbe with the immigration of Chasidim from Russia and many other projects. See Gefen Yisrael, Bnei Brak: The Life and Legacy of Rabbi Yisrael Zuber; Chana (Zuber) Sharfstein, “The Life and Legacy of Rabbi Yakov Yisroel Zuber,” available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7460C6XRylg.]] “The purpose of being a student of Tomchei Temimim is to brighten the spiritual darkness,”[[138: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 3, letter dated 7 Teves 5695 (December 13, 1934).]] lauding him for organizing classes and farbrengens.
The Rebbe kept in touch with Chasidim across the globe. He wrote to a follower in Montreal about the bond between a Rebbe and a Chasid: “The affection and love is a foundation of chasidic life, and that feeling is not broken by borders and distance.” It is a deep spiritual connection, he wrote, “a bond of soul to soul, enhanced by Torah study.”[[139: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 3, letter to Moshe Sterlin dated 29 Adar Alef 5695 (April 23, 1935).]] In another connection that withstood geographic distance, the Rebbe advised Moshe Feiglin,[[140: Moshe Zalman Feiglin (1875–1957) came from a Chabad family. He left Palestine to escape the Turkish draft at the onset of World War I, moving to Australia. Despite geographic separation, he was an ardent Chasid of the Rebbe and the seventh Rebbe. He established a successful business and helped bring Chasidim to Australia after World War II. Feiglin was instrumental in establishing Chabad in Australia and has been called “the Avraham Avinu of Australia.” See “Moshe Zalman Feiglin and Chabad Australia,” available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fyKNy-Rijco.]] the first Chasid in Australia, on how to ensure that his children would live by his chasidic values. “Each member of anash must relate to his children his memories of his ancestors so they will understand their background.” The Rebbe quoted his father’s dictum, “Just as it’s an obligation to lay tefillin daily, so too a parent must invest an hour each day to instill in his children spiritual values.”[[141: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 3, letter dated 21 Cheshvan, 5696 (November 17, 1935).]]
To connect with the newly established communities and to energize them, the Rebbe renewed the concept of sending personal envoys, shluchim. One of those was Rabbi Zelig Slonim,[[142: Rabbi Azriel Zelig Slonim (1897–1972) was born in Hebron, a great-grandson of Rebbetzin Menucha Rochel, a granddaughter of the Alter Rebbe who moved to Hebron in 1845. As a student in Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim who was a relative of the Rebbe Rashab, Rabbi Slonim enjoyed the special privilege of being invited to the Rebbe’s home for holiday and Shabbat meals. He studied in Russia for seven years, first in Lubavitch and then in other cities as the yeshivah moved due to the disruptions of the war and revolution. He returned to Eretz Yisrael, married, and began to travel on behalf of the Rebbe Rayatz. In 1948, the Rebbe appointed him director of Colel Chabad, the historic charitable fund based in Jerusalem. He took a lead in Chabad in Israel and in Jerusalem in particular. In 1957, he was visiting the US when the seventh Rebbe instructed him to join other Chabad rabbis at a meeting in the White House concerning Israel’s security. The Rebbe instructed the group to introduce Rabbi Slonim to President Eisenhower “as a Jew born in the historic city of Hebron.” Throughout his life, Rabbi Slonim had a close relationship with three Chabad Rebbes, beginning in his youth with his connection to the Rashab, then traveling globally for the Rayatz, and later heading Chabad institutions in Israel on behalf of the seventh Rebbe.]] who started traveling the globe as the Rebbe’s emissary in the 1920s. Slonim was born in Hebron in 1897 and orphaned of his father a year later. His mother trekked to Lubavitch to enroll him in the yeshivah when he was just fifteen. A direct descendant of the Chabad Rebbes, he excelled in his studies and was devoted to the Rebbes, first to the Rebbe Rashab, then his son the Rayatz and the seventh Rebbe. His first formal mission was to England in January 1926.[[143: In 1924, Slonim traveled to the US for two years. This was not a personal mission from the Rebbe; it seems to have been a fundraising trip for Colel Chabad, the charity based in Jerusalem. While the Rebbe encouraged Rabbi Slonim to go and urged him to strengthen the fledgling Chabad community in the US, it was primarily a trip to raise funds.]] The Rebbe was in Russia at the time, locked in spiritual combat with the Yevesektzia but still concerned with the welfare of Chasidim in other countries. He wrote to the community in London,[[144: Rabbi Shalom Ber Wolpa, Eved HaMelech (5765), chap. 12.]] “I am sending you my outstanding student to teach chasidic philosophy and to inspire the anash and strengthen Jewish learning and observance.” While Slonim was there, the Rebbe corresponded with him regularly, asking for “detailed descriptions of each Chabad synagogue, its leadership, and their addresses.”
In England and later in other countries, Slonim was instructed to find positions for Chabad rabbis, shochtim, and others. Through the 1930s, the Rebbe was constantly searching for ways to help his Chasidim and others leave Russia, but it was difficult for Russian Jews to get visas to other countries. In 1924, the US Congress instated severe immigration controls.[[145: Anna Diamond, “The 1924 Law That Slammed the Door on Immigrants and the Politicians Who Pushed it Back Open,” available at: https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/1924-law-slammed-door-immigrants-and-politicians-who-pushed-it-back-open-180974910/.]] One of the ways to facilitate emigration from Russia was to arrange employment overseas.
The Rebbe tasked Slonim with ensuring that Rabbi Mordechai Gutnick,[[146: Rabbi Mordechai Gutnick (1896–1931) studied in Lubavitch and was sent by the Rebbe Rashab to Soviet Georgia. He was appointed rabbi in London with the help of Rabbi Zelig Slonim in 1926 and passed away at the age of 35. Two of his sons were refugees in Australia and became leading rabbis there. See Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter to Slonim dated 26 Adar, 5686 (March 12, 1926).]] who had studied in Lubavitch, would be appointed rabbi of the Nusach Ari (Chabad) synagogue in London. The congregation split between those who wanted a classic Chabad rabbi and those who advocated for a candidate with academic degrees. Slonim argued that the synagogue had been founded by Chasidim and those traditions should be upheld. As the opposition rose, he wrote to the Rebbe in frustration, “The synagogue leaders are giving me all kinds of excuses, but their opposition in not based on reason.” The Rebbe shared an idea to bypass the recalcitrant leaders: “Organize a meeting of all the members and speak to them about the need to have a chasidic rabbi for all anash in England.” Slonim prevailed, and Gutnick was hired. Later the Rebbe commented, “Zelig knows how to get things done.”
Slonim spent a year in England, visiting Scotland and Ireland. This would be the first of a series of missions. After he went home to Jerusalem, Slonim visited the Rebbe, who had relocated to Riga. In 1928 and again in 1929, the Rebbe dispatched Slonim to Scandinavia and other European countries, requesting detailed reports about each community he visited. The Rebbe encouraged Slonim to seek every opportunity to inspire others, instructing him, “Don’t act judgmentally toward them.” The Rebbe wanted him to use a positive approach. “Share memories of what you studied in your time in Lubavitch.”
In 1929, after a short interlude in Eretz Yisrael, the Rebbe sent Slonim to South Africa.[[147: Wolpa, Eved HaMelech, chap. 13.]] Yechezkel Feigin wrote to him on behalf of the Rebbe, “I have been asked to inquire if you are willing to accept a mission to South Africa,” adding that some Chabad Chasidim were there, but “we have little knowledge of what is happening in the country.” It would be a long journey. Slonim’s mission was to connect to the immigrants, strengthen Jewish life there, and find employment for Chasidim. “I am turning to you on behalf of the Rebbe to ask you to explore employment opportunities for rabbis and shochtim,” wrote Feigin. Slonim spent over two and a half years in South Africa visiting communities and nearby Rhodesia. In subsequent years, he was involved with Chabad in Jerusalem, visiting the Rebbe in Europe periodically.
In 1939, Slonim went on his final long mission, this time to Australia. He traveled throughout the country and nearby New Zealand.[[148: Sydney Jewish News, June 23, 1939. The paper noted that Slonim was “a scholar from a distinguished scholar” and that he had the endorsements of the Sephardic chief rabbi of Palestine and the chief rabbis of the UK and South Africa.]] While there, he was involved in a host of projects, such as the building of a mikveh in Brisbane. Seven months after the outbreak of the war, in March of 1940, Slonim headed back to Eretz Yisrael on a long, dangerous trip that departed from Perth on Australia’s western coast and finally arrived in Suez in British-controlled Egypt.
The missions were not always easy. Slonim encountered rabbis[[149: Some of the rabbis in these countries were outstanding; others were not top caliber. Slonim himself was very careful in following the dictates of Jewish law. While in Australia, he could only find a shochet who did not have a beard, a serious breach of religious standards in the chasidic community. Even though the shochet was proficient in the laws of slaughter, Slonim wondered whether he should eat his meat and only did so after receiving instructions from the Rebbe.]] who compromised Jewish law, due to pressure from community members. He had to navigate local politics in his effort to inspire others and remain true to his mission. Throughout his visits, Slonim maintained a regular correspondence with the Rebbe on a wide variety of issues.
Slonim’s missions and those of other Chasidim invigorated the connection of the Rebbe to those with a historical link to Chabad. Traveling as official shluchim of the Rebbe carried an element of prestige. Slonim himself was an outstanding Torah scholar and full of enthusiasm. The Rebbe took a deep personal interest in the reports that Slonim and other emissaries sent him about the Jews they met and the challenges faced by their communities. For many immigrants who had drifted from the fully observant lifestyle, the arrival of a shliach of the Rebbe rekindled the spiritual identity that they knew from the “alter Heim,” the rich religious life that Jews had in Europe. It also sent them an important message that the Rebbe was deeply concerned with their welfare. All of this would serve to revitalize their Jewish identity in a new country with little Jewish infrastructure.
In September of 1930, the Rebbe returned to Europe from his long trip abroad. Instead of going directly home to Riga, he made a stop. “I was weak from the trip and traveled to Marienbad.”[[150: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 4, letter dated 18 Tamuz, 5768 ( July 17, 1938). In a long, self-reflective letter, the Rebbe confides in Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz of Boston about his medical history and the challenges he was facing in Poland at the time. See also Igrot Kodesh 2:272, where the Rebbe discusses his visit to Marienbad on the way back to Riga.]] This resort[[151: Located in northern Czechoslovakia, Marienbad was a spa town with kosher hotels and restaurants that attracted many chasidic Rebbes and prominent rabbis. Located between Eastern and Western Europe, it became a venue for prominent Jewish conferences, including the third Knessiah Gedolah of Agudath Israel in 1937. For a history and memoir, see Dovid Leitner, Marienbad & Beyond (2020).]] with kosher hotels was visited by many prominent rabbis. During the Rebbe’s break there, he met with the Belzer, Aleksander, and Gerrer Rebbes.[[152: In a November 5, 1930 newspaper report cited in the introduction to Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, the headline reads, “Belzer Rebbe Visits Lubavitcher Rebbe.” The story goes on to say that the Rebbe also met with the Aleksander and Gerrer Rebbes. Because Marienbad was so popular amongst prominent rabbis, it became a venue for leaders from different countries and different segments of the Jewish community to meet.]] After three weeks he headed home to Riga. His speech began to slowly change. “The tempo of my speech altered, but I did not pay attention to it,” he wrote. This was the beginning of the series of health challenges that the Rebbe suffered from for the rest of his life. “The Rebbe’s condition raises much concern,” Feigin wrote in the fall of 1932.[[153: Letter to Jacobson dated 25 Cheshvan, 5693 (November 24, 1932).]] “As you know, the sickness in his foot has improved, but he is very weak.” Feigin went on to say that they were using a local physician in Riga. “He comes daily and is very dedicated, but he is not an expert physician.” Describing the deterioration in the Rebbe’s speech, Feigin said, “There is a heaviness in his speaking.”
The Rebbe also recognized the change. “After two years, the weakness in speaking became apparent, and I decided to seek medical help.” The doctors in Riga suggested he travel to Berlin, where there were vastly superior medical resources. Starting in January of 1933,[[154: Zusha Wolf, Admorei Chabad VeYahudut Germania ( Jerusalem: Hekhal Menachem, 2006), 86–87.]] the Rebbe spent two months in a clinic. The doctors did not have a clear diagnosis. “The medical experts, including the renowned Professor Leve, came to a conclusion that they do not know the actual sickness. However, they do recommend that I should be under medical supervision.”[[155: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 4, letter to Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz.]]
The doctors’ consensus was that the Rebbe was weak from years of suffering. “You cannot imagine how much I have endured in the last five and a half years since I was exiled [in 1927],” he said. The Rebbe wrote that he was distraught from the hardships of his Chasidim and disheartened that despite major efforts his fundraising success had been marginal. To help the Rebbe rest, Feigin withheld correspondence.[[156: Jews from around the world wrote to the Rebbe asking for advice and blessings, often sharing their greatest problems with the hope that the Rebbe could provide advice and spiritual blessing. The Rebbe himself acknowledged that the letters were withheld because the doctors feared they would cause stress at a time when he needed to conserve his energy. See Igrot Kodesh, vol. 4.]] “Daily, a large number of letters arrive with all the tzarot Yisrael ( Jewish suffering), and this gives the Rebbe no rest.”[[157: Wolf, Admorei Chabad VeYahudut Germania, letters from Rabbi Yechezkel Feigin, 86–87.]] The Rebbe agreed, writing, “Due to the weakness of my health, the physicians have prohibited me from receiving correspondence and exerting myself.” The Rebbe was not alone in Berlin. “My son-in-law, Rabbi Menachem Mendel, comes daily to visit.”[[158: Igrot Kodesh 11:209.]] In the years to come, the Ramash took the lead in assisting the Rebbe with his medical care, spending extensive time with him in Marienbad, Berlin, and later in Vienna and Paris.
The underlying medical condition causing the Rebbe so much discomfort remained a mystery for almost two years.[[159: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 4, letter to Rabinowitz.]] His condition continued to decline, and in the summer of 1934, the Rebbe traveled to Marienbad for a month, accompanied by the Ramash. In November that year, the Ramash traveled with him to Vienna to consult with medical experts. “The doctors were able to determine the sickness, but they had no medicine to cure it, the Rebbe later wrote.[[160: Ibid.]] He was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis,[[161: Deposition of Chaya Moussia Schneerson, book trial, November 12, 1985, p. 21.]] an autoimmune disease that even today has no real cure. It afflicted him for the rest of his life. The doctors in Vienna offered varied opinions on how to mitigate the illness, creating much confusion. Finally, they met Dr. Max Gerson, a German Jewish doctor who had fled the country with the rise of Nazism. His approach was fundamentally different, prescribing a “regimen of diet and injections.” It was not a conventional medical approach and was rejected by other practitioners. As Rabbi Chaim Miller writes, “Gerson’s holistic approach viewed the patient body as an organism whose various parts, including the mind, are interconnected.” This appealed to the Rebbe.
Still accompanied by the Ramash, he moved into Gerson’s Westend Sanatorium located in Purkersdorf, a town not far from Vienna. The Rebbe arrived there in December 1934 and left a few days before Passover. Gerson’s daughter, Charlotte, who was twelve at the time, recalled[[162: Chaim Miller, Turning Judaism Outward (Brooklyn, NY: Kol Menachem).]] many years later that the Rebbe was a “distinguished figure. He was the wunder rabbi (miracle rabbi), and we children admired him from afar.” When Dr. Gerson moved to France, the Rebbe traveled there for treatment. Between 1933 and 1939, the Rebbe spent some twenty-two months[[163: See appendix 2 for a timeline of the Rebbe’s travels in the 1930s.]] away from his home in medical facilities, primarily the sanatoriums in Berlin, Purkersdorf, and Paris.
The constant need for medical care and travel put a severe financial burden on the Rebbe. Feigin tried to ameliorate the situation by orchestrating a fundraising effort by Chasidim. In the summer of 1936, he wrote to Alter Simchovich in Jerusalem that the Rebbe planned to go to Paris for treatment, but he had pushed off the trip “due to a lack of funds.” He explained that the treatments in Vienna “had caused a small improvement,” but the illness was unique and required the attention “of world-class medical experts.” Feigin told him that Reb Itche Horowitz was “in London and raising money for maamad (support of the Rebbe).” The plan was to send him to Ireland; Feigin asked Simchovitch to secure a letter of recommendation from Rabbi Isaac Herzog, the previous chief rabbi of Ireland who had just been appointed chief rabbi of Eretz Yisrael. “If he will write a letter, since he was the chief rabbi of Ireland it will definitely help.”[[164: Letter from Feigin to Simchovitch dated 13 Tamuz, 5696 ( July 3, 1936), cited in Rabbi Mordechai Ashkenazi, HaRav Ashkenazi [Hebrew], vol. 2, chap. 8.]]
In the sanatoriums, free from some of his usual day-to-day tasks, the Rebbe dedicated much time to writing and correspondence, producing a series of long letters on chasidic history and lore. These included a letter of more than one hundred pages[[165: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 3, letter to “My dear and beloved daughter” dated 16 Shevat, 5695 ( January 15, 1935). Known as “Der Longa Brief” (The Long Letter), it outlined the historical background of the genesis of the chasidic movement. It was written during the time that the Rebbe was in the sanatorium in Purkersdorf.]] on the early history of Chasidism, written in Yiddish to his daughter Chaya Mushka in Paris. Translator Shimon Neubort describes it as “a glimpse into the lives of several early Chasidim who were instrumental in spreading chasidic teachings and the chasidic way of life.”[[166: See “Translator’s Introduction,” available at: https://www.sie.org/templates/sie/article_cdo/aid/2420993/jewish/Translators-Introduction.htm.]] The letter is full of “rich prose” and offers the reader a “graphic portrait of the spiritual rhythms of life in the shtetl and what inspired the Jews of the era.”
When the Rebbe moved to Poland in 1933, he came with few Chasidim and limited resources. The well-established chasidic courts of Ger, Belz, and others had hundreds of thousands of followers and dominated religious life in Poland. The Rebbe realized the future was the youth. He began with one yeshivah with 157 college-age students in 1929. It moved to Otwock and emerged as one of the leading centers of Jewish scholarship in the world, growing to a network of yeshivas in ten more cities. By the eve of the war there were 1,500 students in eleven yeshivas.[[167: Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, 205. Also see a detailed description of the branches, chap. 39–53.]] In many of those communities the yeshivas spawned chadarim (elementary schools) and mesivtas (high schools).
The Rebbe was nurturing Chasidim in a new country, people who lacked the ethos and memories that the Chasidim in Russia had lived with for two centuries. He introduced the study of Chasidism and used his prolific pen to create a literary culture, bringing alive the stories of Chasidim from generations past. He gave those drawn to Chabad a historic identity as lived by the Chasidim who had experienced the greatness of the Rebbes of earlier generations. All this time, the Rebbe strived to remain in close contact with his geographically diverse community. He visited chasidic enclaves in Lithuania and Poland, and he dispatched emissaries to cities in Europe and around the world. The Rebbe encouraged his Chasidim to take up leadership in Jewish communities, setting the stage for the emergence of Chabad around the world in the postwar era.
Constantly weighing on the Rebbe’s heart was the fate of Russian Jewry. During this period, he sustained the Jewish underground network that kept the flame of Judaism alive in Russia, despite the unwillingness of major groups to support his efforts. The Rebbe unsuccessfully lobbied the United States to pressure the Russian government to relax restrictions on religious freedom in Russia. He was in constant contact with his Chasidim in Russia, funneling money, food, and other assistance in a variety of ways. He also worked to help Chasidim immigrate to the West.
It was the personal fate of his Chasidim that was his deepest concern. One Chasid, Moshe Binyamin Kaplan, fled Russia during the Great Escape in 1946. When he arrived in a DP camp in Germany, he wrote to the Rebbe, then in Brooklyn. “I don’t know if the Rebbe remembers me, but I learned in the underground yeshivas in Russia from 1934 to 1939,” he said. “My father was known as the Ksavrov Rabbi, and he met the Rebbe several times. I wonder what kind of bond I can have with the Rebbe since I never met him.” The Rebbe responded, “I remember him very, very well.” Writing in poetic rabbinic Hebrew, he said, “The bond between us is when you learn my Torah,” referring to the Rebbe’s maamarim, “or the Torah I am learning.” Years later, Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin discovered among the Rebbe’s possessions a picture of Moshe Binyamin Kaplan. It was taken in Russia around 1935, when he was about eighteen. It was common at the time for students in the underground yeshivas in Russia to take pictures of themselves and send them via third parties to the Rebbe in Poland. All those years, first in Poland and later in the US, the Rebbe kept his picture and would gaze at it from time to time.[[168: Author’s interview with Moshe Binyamin Kaplan’s son, Rabbi Nochum Kaplan. This unpublished letter from the Rebbe is in the family’s possession.]]
Just as the Rebbe’s life changed dramatically when he was exiled from Russia, it was transformed yet again with the advent of World War II. The German invasion of Poland shattered the Rebbe’s world again, destroying the magnificent network of yeshivas and communities that he had built in Europe after he departed from Russia. The invasion put the Rebbe in mortal danger and set the stage for a miraculous escape from Europe to America – where, yet again, he would start from nothing and adapt to a totally new set of challenges.



