“Gevald, gevald,[[1: A Yiddish idiom expressing shock, similar to the English expression “woe.”]] where was my understanding of the situation? The whole winter, he clearly warned me that he would pass away, and I did not comprehend it.” Late Sunday evening, the Rayatz, now age thirty-nine, confided in Berel Rivkin. It was just hours after the Rashab’s burial; the Rayatz had slowly led the evening prayers in tears. Rivkin recalls, “We spoke for two hours. He cried bitterly.” The Rayatz realized in retrospect that the “long conversations he had with his father during the winter were preparation for this tragic moment.” In the coming months, the Rayatz would share more details with Rivkin. “During the winter of 5680 (1919–20), my father reviewed in detail the spiritual levels and characteristics of each member of anash (the Chabad community).”[[2: Rabbi Moshe Dovber Rivkin, Ashkavta DeRebbe (Brooklyn, NY: 1976), 109.]] The funeral took place at the Jewish cemetery in Rostov[[3: In 1940, the city of Rostov planned to destroy the old Jewish cemetery and build a sports complex in its place. They banned the removal of any remains. Local Chasidim were alarmed at the planned desecration of the grave of the Rebbe Rashab, and they communicated their concerns to the Rayatz, who approved the transfer of his father’s grave to a new Jewish cemetery in Rostov. The renowned kabbalist, Rabbi Levi Yitzchak Schneerson, father of the seventh Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, gave detailed instructions to a group of ten Chasidim on how to transfer the remains of the Rebbe Rashab. The Chasidim prepared themselves spiritually, including fasting that day, and despite the real danger of discovery by local police, they removed the grave late at night and reinterred it. Remarkably, though twenty years had transpired since his passing, the Rebbe’s body remained whole and intact. The grandfather of Rostov resident Marina Kuleshova was part of the group that night and confirmed this detail. He told Kuleshova that when they discovered this, it shocked them. Her account of what she heard from her grandfather can be viewed at https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=324&v=dyoARqOacr0&feature=emb_logo. Additionally, a letter from one of the ten Chasidim, describing the details of the reinterment and the fact that the body was still whole, appears in Ashkavta DeRebbe, 151.]] on Sunday afternoon, mere hours after the Rashab’s passing late Saturday night.[[4: Out of respect for the deceased, Jewish law mandates that funerals be performed as soon as possible.]] The casket, says Rivkin, “was carried to the cemetery by the students of the yeshivah and the elders of anash.” The crowd was massive – “all the Jews of the city were there.” The German invasion had brought the Rebbe to Rostov, and the revolution and upheaval in its wake prevented his return to Lubavitch. Still, hope lingered of eventually returning and reinterring the Rebbe Rashab near his ancestors in Lubavitch. With that in mind, standing ahis father’s fresh grave, the Rayatz publicly turned to three rabbis[[5: A beit din consists of a minimum of three rabbis. Jewish tradition prohibits the relocation of the deceased unless it was stated at the funeral that the interment is being done on condition that the body be moved in the future. As no instructions from the Rashab to inter him in Lubavitch were discovered, he remained buried in Rostov.]] and told them, “I am empowering you as a beit din (rabbinical court) and declaring to you that I am purchasing this grave on condition that I have the authorization to transfer my father to the cemetery of my holy forefathers in the ancestral burial ground in Lubavitch.”[[6: There was an ominous sign that the era of Lubavitch serving as the center of the movement was coming to an end. A month before the Rebbe Rashab’s passing, the synagogue and the home of the Rebbe there were destroyed in a fire. The town of Lubavitch would never regain its prominence; the Holocaust wiped out the city’s final Jewish residents. Though the Rayatz would eventually move to St. Petersburg, Russia; Riga, Latvia; Warsaw and Otwock, Poland; and Brooklyn, New York, he and his successor would forever be known as “Lubavitcher Rebbes” after the small village that was the center of the movement for more than a century.]] The last day of the shivah (week of mourning) coincided with Shabbat, when mourning practices are suspended. Late that afternoon, as the sun was setting, the Rayatz invited Rivkin into his father’s private study. The dimming light spilled into the long rectangular room adjacent to the synagogue through the bay windows facing the street, illuminating the green wallpaper and its decorative floral patterns.[[7: Rivkin, Ashkavta DeRebbe, 109.]] With a broken heart, the Rayatz turned to Rivkin and said, “My father instructed me to teach chasidic discourses to the community. But who am I to do this? How can I stand in front of anash?” Rivkin was taken aback by the suggestion and by the expressions of both humility and sorrow. He attempted to divert the conversation. The Rayatz was wary of reciting an original maamar in front of the Chasidim, and so he came up with a compromise: “I can fulfill that directive by delivering the maamar to you.” Together they paced the wooden floor of the high-ceilinged room. The Rayatz repeated his father’s maamar that had been recited a few weeks earlier, on Purim, adding a few insights of his own.[[8: Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn, Sefer HaMaamarim 5680–81, “Reishit Goyim Amalek” (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society).]] When he finished, he asked Rivkin to keep the incident between them. “Why?” Rivkin asked. “I want to share this with others in the community.” Again, the Rayatz implored him to keep it private, but Rivkin remained silent, not giving his word. Later that evening, he shared the experience with others and slowly, news spread that the Rebbe Rashab’s son had delivered a maamar. The Rayatz’s maamar, though said privately, was his first step in accepting the position of sixth Lubavitcher Rebbe, succeeding his father. After the Rashab’s passing, a few of those who had been close to him opened his desk, says Zalman Havlin. “We were surprised to find on the top of the drawer a will with a note attached, saying that his son should accept upon himself the position of Rebbe.” Despite the dark times – being exiled from Lubavitch, the ominous threat of the growing power of the Bolshevik government – the Rashab’s instruction “comforted us, [reassuring us] that the golden chain” of leadership would not be broken,” says Havlin.[[9: See the letter from Zalman Havlin to Dovid Shifrin dated 19 Adar, 5684 (March 7, 1923) as published in Havlin, HaMashpia: The History of Rabbi Zalman Havlin ( Jerusalem: 1982), 89. For another account, see Rivkin, Ashkavta DeRebbe.]] The public section of the will[[10: “The Ethical Will,” available at: chabad.org/149881.]] contained a directive that the Rayatz should continue to teach and mentor the Chasidim.[[11: See chap. 1 of this book.]] (As the will had originally been drafted many years earlier, it also contained guidance regarding the Rayatz’s education.) The section added later focused on the importance of the yeshivah, Tomchei Temimim, and requested that anash continue supporting it and preserving its unique focus on chasidic teachings; the Rashab specified that the executive director of the yeshivah should be “my son.” The yeshivah was a revolutionary accomplishment close to the Rashab’s heart. He saw it not only as the key to the continuity of chasidic teachings and observance, but also as an incubator for a new generation of Jewish leadership in a changing world. The Rayatz revealed his reaction to reading his father’s instructions that he assume the position of Rebbe. “After some time, I opened the will. My eyes darkened when I read that the leadership of the community was placed on me.” He was deeply shaken with the awesome responsibility. “For many days I was overwhelmed; I made a step forward and then took a step back. I became deeply ill, but G-d with His boundless kindness restored me to life, and like a humbled servant, it is incumbent on me to follow my father’s sacred instructions.”[[12: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 14, 10 Shevat, 5682 (February 8, 1922).]] As the news of the Rashab’s passing traveled from Rostov to Poland and the United States, some expressed skepticism over Chabad’s future. Jewish newspapers around the world reported the Rashab’s passing, some with a bleak forecast. As chasidic historian Rabbi Eli Rubin writes,[[13: For newspaper reports about the Rashab’s passing, see Eli Rubin, “Giving Chabad New Life,” available at: chabad.org/4693692, footnote 1.]] “These did not read simply as obituaries. They predicted nothing less than the end of Chabad.” Jonathan Mark opined in New York’s Yiddishes Tageblatt,[[14: Yiddishes Tageblatt, July 23, 1920.]] “He did not leave an appropriate successor. His son hasn’t the aptitude to follow in his place.”[[15: Seven years later, Mark praised the new Rebbe in his book Gedolim Fun Unzer Tzeit – Great Jewish Leaders of Our Times (New York: 1927).]] The relationship between Rebbe and Chasid is voluntary and comes at the initiative and request of the Chasidim. They would select an appropriate candidate among the family members or students of the prior Rebbe and encourage him to accept the position. This was done by collectively writing a letter called a ktav hitkashrut, a pledge of loyalty to the candidate’s leadership, which was signed by the Chasidim. The title of Rebbe does not refer to the position that he assumes, but rather is seen as a reflection of a person’s innate spiritual and intellectual qualities. The Midrash delineates the hierarchy of Jewish leadership: “A scholar comes before a king, a king before a high priest, and a high priest before a prophet.”[[16: Midrash Rabbah, Parshat Naso.]] It explains that kings and priests are replaceable; there is always a crown prince or an assistant high priest waiting in the wings. A scholar, however, is a status one must achieve through effort. Similarly, a Rebbe should be a person of scholarship, piety, empathy, and vision. A true Rebbe is a tzaddik, a deeply righteous person whose life is rooted in sanctity and spirituality. That is not something one can become overnight, like a prince who assumes the position of king. Many progenies of Rebbes were never considered for succession because they lacked the proper qualities. It’s a reflection of one’s essence, achieved by much effort and personal refinement. In the lexicon of chasidic philosophy, this is called “avodah,” which connotes a service of G-d that comes through much personal struggle to reach higher levels of spirituality and the effort to root one’s life in the sacred and selfless. At times, multiple candidates for the role of Rebbe emerged, sometimes splitting a chasidic group. After the passing of the third Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel, in 1869, his youngest son Rabbi Shmuel succeeded him as Rebbe in Lubavitch. At the same time, four of his brothers established themselves as Rebbes in other towns in Russia. Those dynasties eventually petered out when there were no suitable successors. The last leader of those was Rabbi Shmaryahu Noach Schneersohn of Bobruysk (today located in Belarus, some 180 miles from Lubavitch), who passed away in 1924.[[17: After his passing, his Chasidim gravitated to the Rebbe Rayatz. During the tenure of his father and grandfather, there were competing courts of Chabad Chasidim. These varied groups were loyal to the sons of Rabbi Menachem Mendel, the third Rebbe, and their descendants. At this point, with the passing of the last of those Rebbes, Chabad Chasidim who followed the other groups united behind the new Rebbe. The seventh Rebbe said at a farbrengen in 1953, “As the Rebbe, my father-in-law, explained to descendants of Chabad Chasidim of Kopust and Bobruysk that in past years, there had been divisions. This one goes to Kopust, this one to Bobruysk, and this one to Lubavitch. Today, all come together in Lubavitch, including those from Kopust and Bobruysk.” Farbrengen, 12 Tamuz, 5703 (1953).]] With time, the Chabad Chasidim from the various courts coalesced around the Rayatz. There were also cases of candidates declining the position. The Rayatz’s father, the Rashab, was only twenty-three when his father, the fourth Rebbe, Rabbi Shmuel, passed away. Despite being urged by the Chasidim to become Rebbe, he only fully accepted the position eleven years later. The Rayatz’s successor, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, also demurred; it took a year before he acquiesced to the lobbying of the Chasidim that he become the seventh Rebbe. To be a Rebbe is an awesome responsibility of leadership. Untold numbers of people from all backgrounds visit and write, seeking advice, blessings, and inspiration. Rebbes navigate difficult social challenges and controversial communal issues. At the very core, a Rebbe is not a political leader or organization executive, but a spiritual leader steeped in Torah and sanctity. Rebbes accepted the position for life, putting aside all their own physical and spiritual needs and aspirations in order to dedicate themselves to the welfare of others. The Rashab’s passing was a shock. The illness at the end of his life was swift, and the Rayatz was deeply shaken. Writing about his father’s last moments, he said, “A great sense of foreboding fell on me. The heavens were closed, our prayers not accepted.”[[18: Letter dated February 8, 1922 (10 Shevat, 5782).]] A victim of the typhus epidemic, the Rashab passed away at the relatively young age of sixty-one. Now the Chasidim yearned for a new Rebbe, and the Rashab had only one son. There were no other fitting candidates from the other branches of the Schneersohn family. Since the age of fifteen, the Rayatz had been at his father’s side assisting him, and from a young age, he had been entrusted with the leadership of Tomchei Temimim. The Rashab had also trusted his son to lead the Chasidim. Many years earlier, when physicians had informed the Rashab that he might have just three months to live, he pondered going to Eretz Yisrael for what he feared could be his last days.[[19: He recovered, living another twenty-two years.]] When his wife asked him who would take care of the Chasidim if he left, he responded, “Our son.” The Rayatz was then only eighteen years old. The process of the Rayatz becoming Rebbe took a leap forward a few weeks after his father’s funeral. On the first day of Passover, the Rayatz once again told Rivkin that he wanted to recite a maamar privately to him after the evening service, “to fulfill the instructions of my father.” As before, he requested that Rivkin not tell anyone. This time, Rivkin shared the information with others in advance, suggesting they gather outside the room when the Rayatz spoke to him so that they would be able to hear the maamar. Rivkin and the Rayatz entered the Rashab’s private study alone. After the Rayatz began saying the maamar, the Chasidim who were standing in the adjoining small synagogue slowly cracked open the tall double doors and listened in. The Rayatz noticed them hovering in the next room, but he continued reciting the maamar for almost an hour. A week later, as Passover was coming to an end, the Rayatz again told Rivkin that he wanted to confidentially recite a maamar.[[20: Sefer HaMaamarim.]] Rivkin decided the time had come to push the issue further, telling his fellow Chasidim to come inside the room immediately when the Rayatz began. The two of them were alone in the Rashab’s study when the Rayatz started, but within moments, the Chasidim pushed open the doors, filed into the back of the room, and stood listening with concentration. Rivkin described the moment: “It felt exactly like it did when the Rebbe Rashab said a maamar.” The news that the Rayatz had said a maamar in front of the Chasidim uplifted the community despite the sense of loss that they all felt. The only son of the Rebbe Rashab was slowly stepping into the position of his father, though it would take some time. On Rosh HaShanah, the Rayatz resisted blowing the shofar, which his father had done. Only after his mother requested it did he acquiesce, and even then, he blew it only once before passing it to someone else to complete the blasts. It would be a little longer until the Rayatz took the final step forward in leadership by beginning to accept requests from Chasidim for advice and blessings.[[21: Rabbi Yehudah Chitrik, Reshimot Devarim 5745 (Brooklyn, NY: 1995), 2:135.]] The new Rebbe reached out to Chasidim in Russia and other countries via written correspondence. Before World War I, Chasidim flocked to Lubavitch for Shabbat and especially for holidays to listen to the Rashab and his predecessors. Professor David Fishman notes that the rise of Communism made such a thing impossible at this point, and so the Rebbe Rayatz sent letters “to reestablish contact with his scattered Chasidim, after years during which there had been no meetings or mail due to civil war and pogroms.” There was no longer religious Jewish media, and “one of the greatest problems facing religious activists was their isolation and atomization.” The new Rebbe was “seeking out his Chasidim.” He initiated correspondence with them after tracking down their addresses. And he made requests of them: study Torah daily, teach classes to adults, speak before the congregants in their local synagogues, establish a school, influence community members. He also inquired about their welfare – how were they faring, materially and spiritually?[[22: David Fishman, “Rabbi Joseph I. Schneersohn: The Making of a Jewish Religious Leader in the Soviet Union,” in Nadia Kizilova and Alex Agadjanian, eds., Religion and the Russian Revolution (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2023).]] During his lifetime, the Rebbe composed some 100,000 letters.[[23: Between 1983 and 2011, seventeen volumes of these letters were published by Kehot Publication Society, edited by Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin. Each volume has an introduction that provides an overview of the letters and the historical events of the time period of the volume. The earliest volume contains letters dated from 1897, when the Rebbe was just seventeen years old; the ensuing volumes cover the span of his lifetime. They are a rich treasure house of the insights and advice of the Rebbe and an important historical record of his life and contemporary Jewish events. The majority of these volumes are written in Hebrew, some in Yiddish, and a few in other languages, including Russian and English.]] In the wake of the Rebbe Rashab’s passing, great hardships continued to afflict the citizens of Russia. Political unrest, food shortages, and economic turmoil wracked the country, making travel difficult. The czar had been overthrown and the new regime was ushering in far-reaching change to the political and economic systems. The czarist embrace of anti-Semitism was swept away, and opportunities for Jews opened up in commerce, education, and other spheres. Jews played a major role in the emerging government. Despite making up less than two percent of the population, they comprised over nineteen percent of the staff of the newly formed justice ministry, three percent of the trade ministry, and 5.2 percent of the Communist Party.[[24: Nora Levin, The Jews in the Soviet Union Since 1917 (New York University Press, 1988), chap. 3. Jews had a literacy rate of over seventy percent, higher than any other Russian ethnic group. Many young Jews were activists in the revolution.]] The increased influence of Communist Jews did not make it easier for the observant Jews of Rostov, and with time, conditions worsened. During the war, the yeshivah had been transferred from Lubavitch to Kremenchuk, Ukraine. As the conflict continued, many key Jewish community members abandoned the city, drying up sources of financial support. The yeshivah had so little money that the students were forced to ration their bread, eating it only every other day.[[25: In a letter signed by Rabbi Elchonon Dov (Chonye) Morozov, a close confidant of the Rayatz as well as his secretary, the Rayatz writes that in the beginning of the winter of 1920, “we did not yet know that it is good even when there is a slice of bread once in two days, G-d forbid, and it still seemed that one must eat every day.” Igrot Kodesh 14:73.]] In the winter of 1920, with the fear of starvation becoming a reality, the yeshivah relocated to Rostov. The new Rebbe said, “I want Tomchei Temimim to be next to me.”[[26: Unpublished memoirs of Reb Yitzchak Goldin, quoted in Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, 1917–1950 (Kehot Publication Society, 1989), 244.]] Things were not much better there, but thankfully, Rabbi Shmuel Gurary,[[27: Rabbi Shmuel Gurary (d. 1921) was a student in Lubavitch during the time of Rabbi Shmuel. He was a successful businessman and philanthropist and an ardent Chasid and financial supporter of both the Rashab and the Rayatz. He was originally buried near the Rashab and transferred surreptitiously to the new Jewish cemetery, where he was once again interred next to the Rashab.]] a noted philanthropist who had been a long-time supporter of the yeshivah, stepped forward to help, even though the revolution had weakened his business. “He borrowed funds and sold expensive personal property” to keep the yeshivah afloat, wrote the Rebbe.[[28: Igrot Kodesh, 175.]] With the move of the yeshivah to Rostov, Rabbi Shmaryahu Gurary (the Rashag), the fiancé of the Rebbe’s oldest daughter, Chanah, was appointed executive director, and Yitzchak Goldin[[29: Reb Yitzchak Goldin (1900–68) came from a Chabad family and studied in Lubavitch. He assisted the Rebbe during his illness in Rostov. In 1932, he was arrested for his activities in the Chabad educational underground. Initially he was sentenced to death, but his sentence was commuted to exile in Kazakhstan. He escaped Russia in 1946, eventually moving to Brooklyn.]] became his assistant. Within two weeks, about eighty boys showed up, writes Goldin. “Many were very ill and wearing torn clothing.”[[30: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit.]] Goldin was tasked with preparing apartments for them. The Rebbe told him, “Yitzchak, the door is open for you; whenever you need, as many times as you need during the day, just enter.” The Rebbe took a keen interest in the students, observing them from his window that looked out onto the courtyard. Goldin writes, “One time he called me over and said, ‘I want very much for each boy to have two uniforms [suits], one for Shabbat and one for weekdays, but what can I do that I don’t have the funds? But at least the same jacket could be mended and not torn.” The Rebbe wanted the students to walk the streets with a sense of dignity so as not to provoke the Communists: “One doesn’t have to needle them.” The yeshivah did not have the funds to pay teachers, so senior students assumed the role of staff. The Rebbe said, “It is a time of war – mobilized soldiers become officers.”[[31: Ibid. These students included Shlomo Chaim Kesselman, who later became a legendary mashpia.]] With Reb Shmuel Gurary’s financial support, the students were able to continue learning throughout the summer of 1920 and into the beginning of the following winter.[[32: Igrot Kodesh, 175.]] That summer, a few boys passed away. As tradition mandates, the Rebbe led the services during the year of mourning. Goldin recalls that the prayers were recited with “a loud voice and accompanied by much crying.”[[33: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit. He notes that this was particularly the case when it came to the prayers of Refa’einu (“May we be healed”) and Shema Koleinu (“Hear our voice”).]] In November 1920, the typhus epidemic intensified in Rostov. The Rebbe became ill and unable to lead evening services.[[34: On Monday night, November 8, 1920 (28 Marcheshvan, 5681).]] In the days that followed, Goldin remained next to him, administering his medicine. Shortly afterward, the Rebbe’s mother, Rebbetzin Shterna Sara, and his three daughters also caught the dreaded disease. On the Shabbat after the disease struck, the Rebbe had enough strength to say a maamar,[[35: It was Shabbat Parshat Toldot, November 13, 1920 (2 Kislev, 5681). Sefer HaMaamarim, 5681.]] but then the illness intensified. His situation became grave,[[36: As the Rebbe wrote in a letter signed by one of his students (Yehoshua Rosenblum) during the summer of 5681 (1921), published in Igrot Kodesh 13:55.]] and the doctors said that he had little chance of surviving. Professor Milsalavski told Goldin, “From a medical point of view there is no cure, but this is Rabbi Schneersohn, and because of that, you can believe that it is possible that he will heal.” Yehudah Chitrik,[[37: Chitrik writes that a rabbinical court convened, asking the students to donate time from their lives for the Rebbe. “The students presented the court with written pledges. Some committed six months of their lives, others a year or two years.” In the 1980s, Chaim Lieberman, secretary and librarian of the Rebbe, located the list of the years pledged and found that it added up to thirty years – the number of years the Rebbe lived after his recovery (heard at the time by Rabbi Yossi Keller). There is a precedent for this in the Torah: The Zohar (I 168a) states that the patriarchs and Yosef HaTzaddik each gave up years of their lives for King David, so that he could live a full life (see “Donations for David,” available at: chabad.org/379756).]] then a yeshivah student, later recalled: “The Rebbe was in critical condition. Led by Reb Itche der Masmid, we went to pray repeatedly at the Ohel of the Rashab.”[[38: Goldin telegrammed Chabad Chasidim in Lubavitch, Nizhyn, and Hadyach to pray at the graves of earlier Lubavitcher Rebbes.]] Finally, after some three weeks,[[39: In the letter that the Rayatz sent out with Rabbi Morozov’s signature (Igrot Kodesh 14:175), he states that the improvement began on 19 Kislev, 5682 (November 30, 1920). That Hebrew date marks the release of Rabbi Schneur Zalman from czarist prison in 1798, representing a divine vindication of his teachings. The day is known as the New Year of Chabad Chasidism and continues to be celebrated in Jewish communities worldwide.]] the tide turned and the Rayatz started to recover, though it would take longer to return to his full strength. Chitrik writes that the Rebbe was still too weak to stand. As he was still in the months of mourning for his father, “every day a group would come to make a minyan. He reclined on the bed as he led the services and recited Kaddish.” Three months later, while observing the Fast of Esther the day before Purim, the Rebbe fainted. He nevertheless completed the fast. He asked the doctor if he could farbreng[[40: Lead a chasidic celebration.]] and say a maamar on Purim. The doctor allowed it but instructed him to limit the maamar to fifteen minutes and to keep the farbrengen brief as well. The next day, Purim 1921, he recited a maamar for two and a half hours and sat afterward for more than three hours with the Chasidim.[[41: Yehuda Chitrik, Reshimot Devarim (Brooklyn, NY: 1981), 1:187–88. Also see the 2009 edition, 404.]] Many of the students of the yeshivah also fell ill. The epidemic added to the economic woes. The Rebbe was forced to borrow large sums to keep the yeshivah afloat and pay the mounting medical bills. Shmuel Gurary soon passed away, exacerbating the financial crisis. As the winter wore on, the financial pressures, coupled with famine and disease, prompted some students to leave the yeshivah and return home. The Jewish newspaper in Chicago reported that “the yeshivah students who have evacuated Lubavitch for Rostov-on-Don are starving.”[[42: The Sentinel, August 9, 1921.]] Others stayed in Rostov and set out in search of ways to make a living. The grand yeshivah of Lubavitch, once one of the great centers of European Jewish scholarship, was whittled down by war, famine (1921–22), and disease to just forty students in Rostov.[[43: The other major yeshivas had all left or were in the process of departing Russia, though there remained some local study programs. Later, in 1957, at a time when Russians showed a bit of tolerance, a small government-sanctioned yeshivah opened in Moscow’s Choral Synagogue. By 1962, it had just six students.]] But all these challenges paled in comparison to the looming threat to the Rebbe and Judaism in general: the dreaded Yevesektzia. Established in 1917 to fortify Bolshevik control over the Jewish masses, the Yevesektzia, the Jewish section of the Communist Party, began to consolidate its power and exert its influence. It remained a major force until it was dismantled by Stalin in 1930, after which many of its leaders were killed or exiled in the Great Purge. The Rebbe became its primary adversary and the focus of its persecution. He suffered much at its hands, culminating with his arrest and exile.[[44: Goldin writes about the Yevesektzia’s first attempt to disrupt the yeshivah in Rostov: “On Shavuot, the Yevesektzia brought orders to the boys that they should go work. At that time it was obligatory for the local citizens to clean the streets for two or three days when it was one’s turn. I approached the Rebbe to ask what we should do, and he said, ‘What connection do we have with them? Today is the giving of the Torah – we have to receive the Torah! We have no connection to them!’ Then he added: ‘This is true in general. Regarding this particular issue, approach the officer in charge and tell him that today is Shavuot, and if he needs something, you will take care of it.’ I immediately went over to the officer in charge. I noticed that his wife was sick and that he needed wine in order to heal her, but he didn’t have any means to get it. I gave him the message and I got for him what he needed, and because of this he absolved all the boys from participating in public works.” See Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit.]] At the time, most of Russia’s Jews were traditional, many religious. Even those not fully observant came from Orthodox families and had an appreciation of tradition. They were tethered to the classic Jewish communal structure, the kehillah that included synagogues, schools, and chadarim (traditional Jewish elementary schools). Most cities boasted their own community rabbis, many of them prominent scholars. Though some one million Jews had emigrated to the United States and other countries in the previous decades, four million Jews remained in the newly established Soviet Union.[[45: American Jewish Yearbook, 1920–21.]] The Yevesektzia’s campaign was not just an attack on religion but on a way of life, writes historian Nora Levin.[[46: Levin, The Jews in the Soviet Union Since 1917, 70–71.]] “A Jew’s religious beliefs and observances infused every aspect of his daily life and were invested with national values and feelings.” Everything was centered on the Jewish community: “Family relations, work, prayer, study, recreation, and culture were all part of a seamless web.” The new Communist government aimed to wipe out religion. “Religion is the opium of the people,” revolutionary Vladimir Lenin famously said. Lenin promoted the belief that religion was a form of oppression. The Communists debated how to minimize religious influence. Soviet law permitted personal observance; however, the Communists viewed organized religion as a political threat. The new Communist government launched an assault on the Russian Orthodox Church, which had been aligned with the czarist government.[[47: Richard Pipes, Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime (Vintage Books, 1995), chap. 4.]] During the famine of 1921–22, it moved to confiscate the treasures of the church “for the benefit of the hungry.” Lenin ordered show trials for church leaders with death sentences that were determined in advance. The Communists initiated a strategy of divide and conquer: They backed a small group of clergy who supported their agenda, creating a new religious group, the “Living Church,” to undermine the existing leadership.[[48: When it came to Islam, the Communist government acted with restraint. As Pipes writes, “The Muslims fared relativity the best. Their comparatively lenient treatment was due entirely to political considerations, namely the fear of alienating the colonial nations whose support was critical to the strategy of the Communists. Sultan Galieve, the leading Communist expert on the subject, cautioned Moscow that anti-religious propaganda among Muslims had to be conducted in a circumspect manner, not only because of their strong attachment to the faith, but also because they regarded the Muslim community as an undivided whole and a perceived attack on one as an attack on all.” Pipes, Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime, 367.]] The same tactics were replicated in the Jewish community by creating the Yevesektzia, a Jewish group supportive of Bolshevik goals. Many of the Yevesektzia members had come from the Bund, the secular workers’ party that had a paltry thirty-four thousand members in 1917. Historically hostile to Jewish religious observance and Zionism, they aggressively targeted both – at times exceeding the government policies that wavered between aggressive attacks on religion and tolerance of personal religious practice. Often, the Yevesektzia acted more zealously than the government authorities to repress Judaism. The Yevesektzia had a staunch core of passionate activists. Few were Jewish scholars. One exception was its leader, Semyon Dimenstein.[[49: Dimenstein was born in Sebezh, today in Belorussia, in 1886. He was considered the representative of Russian Jews of the Soviet Authorities. Like many other leaders of the Yevesektzia, he was killed during the purges of Stalin in 1938.]] Born in 1886 to a chasidic family, he attended the yeshivas in Slabodka and Lubavitch and received rabbinic ordination from Vilna’s renowned scholar, Rabbi Chaim Ozer Grodzinski. This was not the first time in Jewish history that Jews took up the battle against religious observance. During the Syrian-Greek reign over Judea that led up to the story of Hanukkah, Jewish Hellenists similarly sided with their rulers to stamp out religious belief. The members of the Yevesektzia were zealous in seeking to prove their loyalty to Communism, systematically attempting to stamp out Judaism. Historian Zvi Gitelman says that with the Yevesektzia’s negligible membership[[50: Dimenstein himself admitted this. See Yehoshua Gilboa, A Language Silenced: The Suppression of Hebrew Literature and Culture in the Soviet Union (Herzl Press), chap. 4.]] and prevailing sense of insecurity, they “were determined to prove themselves more Bolshevik than Lenin.”[[51: Zvi Gitelman, A Century of Ambivalence: The Jews of Russia and the Soviet Union, 1881 to the Present, 2nd edition (Indiana University Press, 2001), chap. 2.]] The Yevesektzia’s campaign exceeded the mandate given to it by the government, at times even forcing the Russian authorities to intervene on behalf of the Jewish communities in order to restrain the Yevesektzia from closing a synagogue or persecuting their brethren. The Rebbe argued that Soviet law permitted freedom of religion and that Jewish religious life had no connection to politics. The real enemies of Jewish religious expression were the Jews of the Yevesektzia who had turned on their own. The Yevesektzia similarly targeted the growing influence of Zionism.[[52: For a detailed account of the Yevesektzia campaign against Zionism, see Gilboa, A Language Silenced.]] They touted Yiddish as the language of the “Jewish proletariat”[[53: Gitelman, A Century of Ambivalence; Gilboa, A Language Silenced. At the June 1919 Yevesektzia conference in Moscow, the First Jewish Educational Council was established, and one of its decisions was that Hebrew and Bible would not be taught in elementary schools. Der Kommunist published in Kharkiv in January 1922, “We have closed down all Hebrew courses.” A year later, Der Emes reported in August 1923 that there were five hundred Yiddish books in the Bichov library in the Homel region, and that the Hebrew language ones had been removed. Cited by Gilboa, A Language Silenced.]] and Hebrew as “bourgeoisie,” abolishing the study of Hebrew culture and language as championed by the Zionism. They established a new network of state-run Yiddish schools. By 1929, there were 1,100 such schools in the Soviet Union, attended by some 130,000 students. Jewish religion, history, Hebrew, and tradition were excluded from the curriculum. Some parents saw these schools as a pathway toward integration into Communist society. Many religious parents chose to send their children to non-Jewish schools to avoid the anti-religious propaganda that was central to the Communist Yiddish schools.[[54: Gitelman, A Century of Ambivalence, chap. 3.]] As part of its assault on Zionism, the Yevesektzia set its sights on the Hebrew language theater, Habima, which had been organized at the onset of the revolution in 1917, even gaining government recognition. In 1919, when the Soviet ministry of culture approved a grant to the theater, Dimenstein protested,[[55: In response to Dimenstein’s protest, a public debate was held in Moscow in 1920. Writer and theater critic Prince Serge Wolkowski described the core issue in his memoir, writing that the Habima Theater represented the “aspirations of some Jews to set up a state of their own in Palestine.” That was anathema to the Jewish Communists, who were intent on building their own version of utopia in the new Soviet Union. See Gilboa, A Language Silenced.]] claiming they were giving in to “the whim of the bourgeoisie.”[[56: The Rebbe argued time and again that the driving force behind the harshness of the anti-religious campaign was the Yevesektzia, not the Soviet government. Though the Communist authorities wanted to rid Russia of religious expression, they were more tolerant, and Soviet law technically allowed freedom of religion. The fact that the government awarded grants to the Habima Theater while Yevesektzia leaders such as Dimenstein strongly opposed these actions is an indicator that at times, there was disagreement between the Yevesektzia leaders and government officials. Later, in the 1930s, after the Yevesektzia was disbanded, government actions against synagogues and religious leaders became harsher. For more on the extremism of the Yevesektzia, see Yehuda Geberer, “Treacherous Brothers: The Yevsektsia Destroys Jewish Life in Russia,” available at: https://jsoundbites.podbean.com/e/treacherous-brothers-the-yevsektsia-destryoys-jewish-life-in-russia/.]] Dimenstein and his Yevesektzia henchmen acted more fanatically than the government when it harassed the Habima actors. In 1926, the whole troupe departed Russia on a government-sanctioned international tour. Once they left, they never returned, instead relocating to Tel Aviv.[[57: Gilboa, A Language Silenced, chap. 6. In 1958, Habima became the official national theater of Israel.]] In the months following the Rashab’s passing, the Yevesektzia increased its campaign against Jewish observance. As the new Rebbe was taking a larger role in opposing them, they targeted him. One morning in July 1920, while the Rebbe was still in the year of mourning for his father, three men appeared in the synagogue as he was completing his prayers. They were officers of the feared secret police, the Cheka,[[58: The secret police was established in December 1917 by the Communists. In 1923, it became the GPU, later the OGPU, NKVD, and finally the KGB in 1954.]] who worked with the Yevesektzia, each armed with ammunition belts across their chests. Two of them were Jews, and one was familiar to the Rebbe; the Rebbe had lent him money during hard times before the revolution. That kindness forgotten, he was now a Yevesektzia member. “Take off your tallis and tefillin and come with us,” the familiar officer ordered harshly. The Rebbe calmly indicated that he was going to finish his prayers and only then would he accede to their request. The two Jews insolently repeated the demand, only to have the non-Jewish officer intervene and instruct them to wait until the end of the prayers. When the service concluded, they left the synagogue escorting the Rebbe like a common prisoner, one armed officer on either side and one in the rear. At the police station, the Rayatz was brought into a large room with a long conference table in its center. The Rebbe was seated at one end with fifteen armed officers sitting along the sides and another two at the other head. This setup was designed to intimidate. The officer sitting at the head of the table addressed the Rebbe. “We are the committee charged with reviewing religious affairs,” he began. “We met with Rabbis Berman and Goldberg[[59: Local Rostov rabbis.]] and now we would like Rabbi Schneersohn to answer some questions for us about Judaism and Kabbalah.” Clearly, the agenda was not about acquiring a better understanding of Judaism, but an attempt to intimidate the Rebbe into limiting his religious activities. They spoke in Russian, but the Rebbe responded in Yiddish, correctly discerning that almost all the men were Jewish. Looking them squarely in the eye, he told them, “The police questioned me already twice before. I will not budge from my principles. I didn’t then, and I won’t now. No person who has yet been born will budge me from my ideals even one iota.” Those sitting around the table each had a gun set before them. One of the officers lifted his gun and said, “This toy eliminates principles, and its fear causes mouths to open.” The Rebbe’s response was swift. Still speaking in Yiddish, he replied, “You have made a mistake. This toy only impresses those who have no faith and weakness of heart – people who have one world and many gods and who worship their desires. We, however, have one G-d and two worlds.[[60: The core principles of Judaism include the belief in the absolute oneness of G-d and the promise of an afterlife. See Maimonides’s Thirteen Principles of Faith.]] This toy you hold does not impress me, nor does it instill any fear.” They began questioning the Rebbe, asking if Judaism was based on faith or an actual knowledge that the tradition is true. The Rebbe responded that Judaism was based on “absolute knowledge” and then reproached them, “I am willing to answer your questions, but if you were interested in astronomy, would you accost a university professor on the street and ask him to explain the science? He would tell you to come to his observatory, and there he would teach you about the stars. So too here, if you really want to understand Judaism, you must come to the yeshivah and gain a proper comprehension of its complexities and teachings.” With that, the interrogation ended,[[61: A few weeks later, on August 8, 1921, the Cheka issued a document attesting to the release of the Rebbe. See Menachem Zigelbaum, Sippur shel Chag (Kfar Chabad: 2011), 45.]] just one act in the drama of a conflict that would play out in the coming years. The Yevesektzia staged show trials against religion, designed to mock Judaism and intimidate its adherents. A large community venue was selected for these trials, and witnesses prepared. Levin describes the cheder (traditional Jewish school) on trial in Vitebsk that was scheduled for January of 1921. Five thousand local Jews came out to protest the intimidation, “shouting to stop the trial and threatening to close the cinema where the trial was being held.” Thousands of others assembled in local synagogues to protest. Uneasy Yevesektzia members called off the trial after being threatened physically, but their hesitation did not last long. A short time later, they regrouped and staged a second trial in which the cheder was sentenced to be liquidated. In February 1921, a similar trial was organized by the Yevesektzia against the Lubavitch yeshivah in Rostov. “They testified with lies,” the Rebbe described in a letter,[[62: The letter from the Rebbe was signed by his secretary Rabbi Chonye Morozov and dated December 12, 1921. Igrot Kodesh 14:175–76.]] “and forcefully demanded that the yeshivah be closed and that its students become part of the army of workers.” During this time, the Yevesektzia forced their way into the Rebbe’s home, where they seized household goods, clothing, and silver inherited from his father. They even took his furniture, filling three large vehicles, and imprisoned three students and his future son-in-law, Rabbi Shmaryahu Gurary.[[63: Rabbi Rafael Kahn, Lubavitch VeChayalehah (Kfar Chabad, Israel: 1983), 120.]] For five days, they sat in a prison cell with society’s worst criminal elements until the Rebbe successfully convinced the prosecutor that the allegations were utterly false. Though Gurary and the students were released, none of the property was returned. The battle against the Yevesektzia was taking a toll. The financial pressure was immense, and the Rebbe writes that “even sources of loans had disappeared.”[[64: Igrot Kodesh 14:175–76, letter dated December 12, 1921.]] It was clear that the yeshivah had no future in Rostov. In Poltava, 375 miles to the west in Russian Ukraine, a group of local Chabad followers were willing to underwrite the yeshivah. The famine was not as severe there, and the area boasted a strong, well-organized, diverse community[[65: “Poltava,” available at: https://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/poltava.]] of some twenty thousand Jews. Twenty traditional chadarim, a modern Jewish school, Zionist organizations, and a wide variety of social programs were all part of community life in Poltava. The Yevesektzia was less influential there, and it was hoped that the yeshivah would be under less scrutiny. They could not obtain authorization to travel to Poltava from Rostov by train, so forty students made the four-hundred-mile trip by horse and wagon. During the summer of 1922, the Rebbe appointed Rabbi Yechezkel Feigin[[66: Rabbi Yechezkel (Chatche) Feigin (1895–1941) was a student of the yeshivah in Lubavitch until 1911, when he was one of the outstanding students sent by the Rebbe Rashab to establish a yeshivah in Hebron. He returned to Russia in 1914, where he became an organizer of the underground network of Tomchei Temimim yeshivas in the Soviet Union. Prior to serving as administrator of the yeshivah in Poltava, Rabbi Feigin was a teacher in the yeshivah in Homil. Starting in 1927, he served as a secretary to the Rebbe and accompanied him on many of his travels. He escaped Warsaw with the Rebbe, arriving in Riga in 1939. Due to issues with his passport, he was unable to travel to the United States with the Rebbe. All efforts (even those of the Rebbe) to help Rabbi Feigin immigrate failed. In December 1941, the Nazis brought most of the city’s Jews to a synagogue and set it on fire with everyone inside, forcing other Jews to watch the spectacle. According to some reports, Rabbi Yitzchak Gurevitz removed the Torah scroll from the holy ark and danced with Rabbi Feigin as they burned alive along with the rest of the Jews inside, in sanctification of G-d’s name. When the Rebbe received a letter about their deaths in 1945, he fainted from grief.]] to be the administrator of the central yeshivah in Poltava. With time, the difficulties of Rostov spread to Poltava as well. In 1922, the yeshivah sent a letter to supporters describing the rising costs of food and the lack of basics beyond “the black bread we get daily.” There too, they became a target of the Yevesektzia. After two years, they moved the yeshivah to Kharkiv for six months, and then back to Rostov. In one form or another, the yeshivah managed to survive the next seventy years in the Soviet Union.[[67: For a detailed history of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim in Russia in Communist times, see Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 51–98.]] Between 1922 and 1940, it opened and closed in twenty-seven cities, at times operating in multiple locations simultaneously. Branches were even opened in remote Soviet Georgia, where the Communist rule was less overbearing. In 1936, Rabbi Elchonon Morozov wrote in a letter from Russia to his friend Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson in New York, “The yeshivah is operating in five cities and other smaller branches with three hundred students.”[[68: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 87.]] During the Second World War, in October 1942, a branch of the yeshivah was established in the remote city Samarkand in Uzbekistan, and within a short period of time another branch was established in Tashkent. As Communism weakened, the yeshivah operated more openly. In the late 1980s, many students studied in Moscow’s Marina Rosche Chabad synagogue. The students educated during those Communist years became the nucleus that sustained Jewish life there until the fall of the Soviet Union. As the new Rebbe fought to save Judaism in Russia, other prominent rabbinic leaders took a different approach. Some rabbis stayed put, trying their best to help their communities despite the intense anti-religious campaigns of the Yevesektzia. Most kept under the radar, valiantly trying to keep the spirit of Judaism alive locally without drawing the attention of the authorities. One of the dozens who remained was the venerable Rabbi Moshe Feinstein,[[69: Rabbi Moshe Feinstein (1895–1986) became the dean of Mesivta Tifereth Jerusalem in the United States. Commonly known as “Reb Moshe,” he was one of the greatest Jewish legal scholars of the twentieth century. His rabbinical responsa on contemporary issues are considered foundational. Reb Moshe recalls in an autobiographical insert in his classic Igrot Moshe that while in Russia, he asked a delegation from the Rebbe who had come to invite him to a rabbinical conference, “What do I have to do with Lubavitch?” The Rebbe sent a message explaining his family connection to Chabad. Reb Moshe recalled, “my father’s grandmother, Rochel, was an outstanding student and lived in Liozna. Her father went to the first Chabad Rebbe asking for advice to help his intellectually precocious daughter. He suggested that she join the cheder class of his grandson, Rabbi Menachem Mendel [who later became the third Rebbe, known as the Tzemach Tzedek].” The great-grandmother of Rabbi Moshe Feinstein was therefore a classmate of the Tzemach Tzedek, one of the leading Jewish scholars of nineteenth-century Russia. See Rabbi Shimon Finkelman, Reb Moshe (ArtScroll Publications, 2006); Igrot Moshe, Orach Chayim, section 5, Yoreh De’ah, section 4 (New York, NY: 1996).]] the rabbi of Lyuban, Belorussia, then part of the Soviet Union. Like many other rabbis, he preserved a core of observant Jews in his city as the next generation gravitated toward Communism under the relentless anti-religious propaganda. In 1937, he immigrated to the United States.[[70: He was granted an exit visa as a result of lobbying on his behalf by relatives who lived in the United States.]] The leaders of the great yeshivas of Russia – Slabodka, Slutsk, and others – fled with their students during the early years of the Communist regime. Rabbi Isser Zalman Meltzer, dean of the Belarussian Slutsk yeshivah, immigrated to Palestine after being imprisoned for teaching Torah, and his son-in-law, Rabbi Aharon Kotler, relocated the yeshivah to Kletsk in Poland. Similarly, the celebrated scholar Rabbi Moshe Soloveichik[[71: David Fishman, “Preserving Tradition in the Land of Revolution,” in Jack Wertheimer, ed. The Uses of Tradition (New York: Jewish Theological Seminary, 1992).]] moved to Warsaw, accompanied by his eighteen-year-old son, prodigy Rabbi Joseph Ber, who would later emerge as a leading rabbi in the United States. The chasidic Rebbes of Skver, Rachmistrivka, and Trish fled to Ukraine with some of their Chasidim. Rabbi Yisrael Meir Kagan, the saintly Chafetz Chaim,[[72: Rabbi Yisrael Meir Kagan (1838–1933) was also known as the Chafetz Chaim, the title of his classic work on Jewish ethics. He was one of the leading rabbis of Europe, respected greatly for his piety, scholarship, and integrity. Among his numerous works is the Mishnah Berurah, a running commentary on the Shulchan Arukh. He established a yeshivah in Radin, Poland in 1869, which he transferred to Russia at the beginning of World War I. He was one of the leaders of Agudath Israel.]] had transferred his yeshivah to Russia from Poland in 1915. He moved it back in March 1921, when he was in his early eighties. As he was leaving Russia, he stopped in Minsk, where he told the local community rabbi, Nissan Telushkin, in a trembling voice, “I have no strength left to battle this malicious government and the evil renegades who have arisen in our midst, who oppose us and are ready to force yeshivah students to desecrate the Shabbat.”[[73: Moses M. Yoshor, The Chafetz Chaim (Mesorah Publications, 1984), vol. 2, chap. 55.]] It was a decision he would come to regret, later in life reflecting, “I should have remained. A Jew must be ready to sacrifice himself for Judaism. What could the Soviets have done to me, shot me to death or hung me on the gallows?”[[74: Yoshor, The Chafetz Chaim, chap. 67.]] In the era of Communism, Tomchei Temimim remained the last bastion of Jewish scholarship[[75: For a brief time, the Novardok yeshivah continued operating in the Soviet Union. Rabbi Yosef Yozel Horwitz (1847–1919), the Alter, instructed his students to leave Russia for Poland, where Novardok developed an impressive network of yeshivas.]] functioning in Russia, moving from one city to another to avoid persecution. The exodus of the prominent rabbinic figures of the era was a stark contrast to the insistence of the new Lubavitcher Rebbe to remain; it represented a fundamental difference in priorities and strategies for Jewish survival. The scholars who stood at the helm of the great yeshivas of Russia felt that their most vital task was to preserve Torah study. That mission was paramount, and since, in their view, Jewish learning could not flourish in a hostile Communist regime, they departed for safer countries. The Rebbe saw things differently. Though the yeshivah was the crown jewel of his efforts, as Rebbe, he carried a responsibility for each and every Jew, not only his students. To abandon the Jews of the Soviet Union and transfer his yeshivah to a friendlier environment would hand victory to the Yevesektzia and spell certain extinction of Judaism in Russia. He chose to stay and stand his ground. Only after building an underground network that could sustain Jewish life under Communism – and faced with the threat of death – did he leave. Even then, he continued his work from overseas, funneling financial resources, guidance, and support to the underground network. The diverse strategies between the Rebbe and the heads of the Lithuanian-style yeshivas reflected a deeper debate. It would emerge again two decades later, in the early 1940s, when some of those same scholars charted a different path in the United States than the Rebbe. They opened yeshivas as citadels of scholarship, focusing on a small nucleus of students, advocating for an insular brand of Judaism, preserving the core.[[76: A strong argument can be made that this strategy bore many elements of success. In Lakewood, New Jersey, where Rabbi Aharon Kotler pioneered this approach, there are more than five thousand students studying today. The influence of the yeshivah community is felt in religious communities across America. But beyond the Orthodox community, its role is marginal, not reaching the majority of American Jews who have little connection to the yeshivah community. Chabad’s approach of sending shluchim to build centers of Jewish life, which become an integral part of those communities, has had a vastly greater impact.]] In contrast, the Rebbe campaigned for fundamental change in general Jewish life worldwide. He established the first network of Jewish day schools in the United States[[77: Merkos L’Inyonei Chinuch, Chabad’s central organization for Jewish education, was founded by the Rayatz in 1943. Other national Jewish organizations such as Torah Umesorah came later.]] and later, in the postwar era, laid the foundation for global Jewish renaissance by dispatching his Chasidim to live in Jewish communities around the world in order to rebuild Jewish life in those locations. This division reflected a two-century-old debate, going back to the founding of the chasidic movement by Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov in 1734.[[78: The Baal Shem Tov began to publicly teach the ideas of Chasidism in 1734, at the age of thirty-six. See Peretz Golding, “The Baal Shem Tov – A Brief Biography,” available at: chabad.org/1208507.]] At the time, the yeshivas of Eastern Europe were bastions of elitism, detached from the average layman in the shtetls. One of the Baal Shem Tov’s unique teachings was the spiritual nobility of every Jew. Contrary to prevailing views, he taught that a simple uneducated tailor could have deeper religious piety than the greatest scholar. And so, though most of the Orthodox leaders left to protect their circles of disciples, the new Lubavitcher Rebbe remained, becoming the dominant figure[[79: “The new Rebbe had become a symbol of resistance to the Soviet System.” David Biale et al., Hasidism: A New History (Princeton University Press, 2018), 593. The renaissance of Jewish life in Russia today is a direct result of the secret underground organized by the Rebbe Rayatz and has proven the success of the strategy he initiated a century ago.]] of Russian Jewry.[[80: Most Jewish historians have failed to document this fully for a variety of reasons. As secular academics, they view the history of Soviet Jewry through their own prism, such as the Enlightenment, Zionism, and Yiddish culture. Much of their research was done while the Soviets were still in power, as was the case for noted historians like Nora Levin (The Jews in the Soviet Union Since 1917, published in 1987) and Zvi Gitelman (A Century of Ambivalence, published in 1988), among others. As Professor David Fishman writes, “Most of the historiography on Soviet Jewry between 1917 and 1930 has paid scant attention to the rabbis, on the assumption that they were insignificant historical players. Instead, the focus has been on secular Jewish elites.” These histories were published prior to the fall of the Soviet Union, when Chabad was still operating illegally in Russia and maintained a policy of absolute secrecy about its activities. There were no public records of the clandestine work in Russia in the postwar era that was orchestrated by the seventh Rebbe, who was at that time living in New York. Much of the instructions sent by the Rebbe to secret emissaries in Russia were given in private face-to-face meetings of which there were no written records. There were many private meetings between the Rebbe and members of Lishkat Hakesher, the secret department that Israel’s prime minister established to handle Russian affairs. Not even members of the Rebbe’s staff were aware of much of the covert work done in Russia. When Chabad activists immigrated to the West in the late 1940s, they did not speak of their activities so as not to endanger those still in Russia. In one example of the extreme secrecy surrounding these activities, Rabbi Binyomin Katz returned to New York from a yearlong mission to Russia and Israel in 1965 that resulted in six hundred Jews leaving Russia covertly. Later, while participating in a public lecture in the United States about Chabad, an audience member asked him about Chabad’s efforts for Soviet Jewry. Katz responded cryptically, saying, “The Rebbe is helping Russian Jews,” without adding any details. Afterward, Rabbi Chaim Mordechai Aizik Hodakov, the Rebbe’s chief secretary, chastised him, saying that even that short comment revealed too much. When written material did appear, such as the book Subbota published in 1979 about Rabbi Lazer Nanes’ twenty-year ordeal in Siberian prison, it was heavily redacted, removing anything that could be used to identify activists and activities still underway in the Soviet Union. The author even used a pseudonym. Only in recent years has some source material come to light, including the thousands of letters of the Rebbe Rayatz that Professor David Fishman calls a “rare and unusual treasure trove” and detailed historical records in Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin’s Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit (History of Chabad in Soviet Russia). That information has been supplemented by a series of memoirs penned by activists and their families. Some of the members of Israel’s secret service, such as Nehemia Levanon, have revealed details of their meetings with the seventh Rebbe. Still, much of what Chabad did in Russia remains a mystery, with many of those who played a role having passed away. More recent works by academics such as David Fishman and Illia Luria have shed light on this era. There have also been important articles and books published by writers in the Chabad community such as Dovid Margolin, Zushe Wolfe, and Boruch Werdiger. Finally, Chabad publications such as the magazine Derher and the proliferation of teshurahs (wedding mementos, often featuring unpublished historical materials) have revealed much original historical information.]] As Russian Jewish historian Avraham Gershoni[[81: Avraham Eliyahu (Romanov) Gershoni, who was born in Russia and immigrated to Israel, is one of the few historians to document religious life in Russia during the Communist regime in a detailed, thorough fashion. He wrote two seminal works, both in Hebrew: The first, Yahadut BeRusia HaSovietit, published in 1961, covers the period until 1930. The second, Yehudei Brit HaMo’atzot, published in 1970, covers the era after 1930. These volumes are crucial to understanding the history of Jews in the Soviet Union. They include many firsthand interviews and in-depth information on the period. They are different from the works produced by American historians who did not live in Russia under Communism and who did not have access to the Hebrew-speaking immigrants in Israel who could share firsthand historical information. These historians tend to view history through a secular perspective and lack a nuanced understanding of religious life in Russia during this time.]] writes, “During the greatest test to Russian Jewry, he was the only Jewish leader who acted.” He adds that the Rayatz was uniquely gifted: “The Rebbe had unlimited self-sacrifice, courage, organizational capabilities, and a broad vision. He was blessed with all of these talents in an outstanding fashion and dedicated them to the welfare of the Jewish community.”[[82: Gershoni, Yahadut BeRusia HaSovietit, 157.]] Many rabbis in Russia, even those from other segments of Orthodoxy, looked to the Rebbe for guidance. Rabbi Aryeh Leib Kaplan had studied at the Slabodka yeshivah and was a protege of Rabbi Baruch Ber Leibowitz. When the Communist influence grew in 1922, Rabbi Kaplan, thirty-eight at the time, decided to immigrate to Palestine. He planned to board a ship at the port of Baku in the Russian province of Azerbaijan. On the way, he stopped in Rostov, where he visited the Rebbe, who advised him to stay to help Russian Jews. Rabbi Kaplan was greatly concerned about the Jewish future in Russia, telling the Rebbe, “I want to leave for the sake of my children.” The Rebbe responded, “If you protect the children of G-d, G-d will watch over your children.” The next day at the train station, Rabbi Kaplan discovered that the group that had gathered in Baku was arrested by the Communist police. Instead of seeking another route, he decided to take the Rebbe’s advice and moved to a community near Kiev, serving as a rabbi there until his arrest in 1939.[[83: He was deported to the remote province of Uzbekistan. A recently discovered NKVD file documenting his arrest reported that on the train to Uzbekistan, he met Rabbi Levi Yitzchak Schneerson, father of the seventh Rebbe, who was also being exiled there. They were banished to small villages thirty miles from each other and remained in contact. Rabbi Kaplan was killed on Yom Kippur in 1943 by anti-Semitic thugs. Rabbi Levi Yitzchak Schneerson passed away in 1944 and is buried in Alma Ata. Author’s interview with Rabbi Kaplan’s grandson, Rabbi Nachum Kaplan.]] His children all survived, escaping to the West in 1946. Three went to Israel and one to the United States.[[84: Rabbi Kaplan placed his children in underground yeshivas run by Chabad in Russia. His son Elimelech grew up to become the senior rabbi of Lod, Israel, and his son Moshe became a rabbi and businessman in New York. His two daughters both married noted Jewish scholars. Today, many of his descendants are Chabad shluchim around the globe. Interview with Rabbi Nachum Kaplan.]] The Rebbe was faced with an extraordinary challenge: a government intent on destroying religious Jewish life. The Bolshevik revolution had dismantled the institutional anti-Semitism of the czarist era, allowing Jews to live anywhere, not just the Pale of Settlement. It opened the doors of commerce and higher education, even though anti-Semitism was still prevalent in Russian culture. The freedom that Communism allowed the Jews came at the price of the elimination of religious observance and Zionism. To promote secular Jewish socialism, Stalin even created a Jewish province on the border of China, in remote Siberia, with its capital Birobidzhan. Jews began settling there in 1928. It had Yiddish street signs, but religious practice was banned.[[85: With the fall of the Soviet Union, Judaism finally came to Birobidzhan. In 2002, Rabbi Mordechai Scheiner became the community’s rabbi, opening a synagogue and Jewish school and reviving Jewish religious life. See https://fjc-fsu.org/centers/russia/birobidzhan.]] Its Jewish population failed to rise above forty-five thousand. Jews had faced religious oppression before. In ancient Israel, in 165 BCE during the Greek rule, Jews revolted because of religious oppression. In the second century, during the Roman reign in Israel, Torah study was also banned, prompting an uprising against the Romans, which sadly led to the deaths of hundreds of thousands. In later historical periods, Jews were forced to navigate the whims of despotic regimes that repressed Jewish religious observance. In the new Communist Russia, the fight against religion was led by Jews themselves, backed by the power of a government. They targeted the youth, attempting to sever them from Jewish practice so that it would eventually die out. Visitors from overseas could find a handful of elderly Jews in a synagogue, studying Talmud in Yiddish. Teaching Talmud in Russian was banned so that younger Jews would not be able to comprehend it. The Rebbe understood the stakes. His conflict with the Yevesektzia was a fight over the next generation, the Jewish future. Thus, while the local community rabbis could potentially survive if they stayed under the radar and did not reach the youth, the Rebbe had a much broader goal: the survival of Judaism in Russia. A local grassroots effort would not suffice. He stood his ground, creating for the first time in Jewish history a spiritual resistance movement that was not local but nationwide, and specifically targeted the youth. This secret Jewish underground operated throughout the Soviet Union, spanning eleven time zones. A strategic plan was needed for Judaism to survive the Communist regime. The Rebbe’s underground network consisted of two parallel responses to the challenge. One involved the broader Jewish community and operated discreetly. The other was a completely clandestine effort, whose details were known only to a few activists who were sworn to absolute secrecy. The Rebbe wanted to take a strident approach; other rabbis advised against it. “For a few days, I pondered the general situation and decided that I must overcome all the obstacles, gird my soul for the sake of Torah, and ignore what others say,” he wrote. What inspired him was a credo of his grandfather, the fourth Rebbe, Rabbi Shmuel, which his father had shared with him: “When you cannot go around an obstacle, you must go over it (in chasidic parlance, lekhatchila ariber). You must fortify yourself, not be affected by anything, and do what has to be done. When you do this, G-d helps from above.”[[86: In a long letter from Riga dated November 10, 1927 (15 Cheshvan, 5688), the Rebbe detailed the struggle in Russia. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1.]] By 1922, the Rebbe was in touch with communities across the country. “There is hardly a city in Russia that I have not been in contact with about the schools, a mikveh, and the placement of rabbis and shochtim.”[[87: Ibid.]] At the same time, he initiated his first quasi-public initiative, establishing the Rabbinical Committee. In a departure from the historic model of decentralization that had dominated Jewish life in Russia, the Rebbe now convened rabbis from all over Russia. Professor David Fishman explains that the Rebbe viewed the committee as “an executive agency for all of Russian Jewry.”[[88: Fishman, “Preserving Tradition in the Land of Revolution.”]] This national organization advocated politically for rabbis in their local battles against the more powerful forces of the Yevesektzia, using Soviet law that permitted religious practice as a counterweight to the Yevesektzia. Not all of the region’s rabbis agreed with the Rebbe’s initiative. Rabbi Shmuel Rabinowitz of Moscow felt that holding the conference would accomplish nothing.[[89: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter dated November 10, 1927.]] But the Rebbe forged ahead, successfully convened rabbis from across Russia, and created a new national rabbinical organization to stand at the helm of Russian Jewry, with him as its chair. Critical to its success was funding, and eventually, in 1924, the US-based charitable fund the Joint Distribution Committee (JDC)[[90: The American Joint Distribution Committee, known as the Joint or the JDC, was established in 1914 as a merger of a variety of American Jewish groups, becoming the primary agency of American Jewry dedicated to helping Jews overseas. The Rebbe and Chabad had a long relationship with the Joint that continues till today. In the early 1920s, it was a vital partner to the Rebbe’s work in Russia. In the 1920s and 1930s, despite the Rebbe’s pleas, it partnered with the Communist regime in establishing agricultural colonies. In the postwar era, it was instrumental in helping Jewish refugees the world over, in particular Chabad Chasidim who had escaped Russia. Starting in the 1950s, it partnered with Chabad in creating a Jewish school system in Morocco and Tunisia, as well as other projects in Israel and throughout Europe. More recently it has worked in cooperation with Chabad in Russia and Ukraine.]] diverted some of its funds to what it described as “cultural work,” code for education and the religious activities of the committee of rabbis. One of the major projects of the Rabbinical Committee was advocating for the legal status of Jewish education.[[91: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 7.]] Rabbi Shlomo Yosef Zevin[[92: Rabbi Shlomo Yosef Zevin (1888–1978) was born in Kazimirov, near Minsk. He studied in the Lithuanian Mir Yeshivah and then in Bobruysk under the chasidic influence of Rabbi Shmaryahu Noach Schneersohn, leader of the Kopust Chabad branch. He served as a rabbi in Kazimirov, Klimovo, and Novozybkov. From 1924–34, he was the secretary of the Rabbinical Council of Russia under the leadership of the Rebbe Rayatz. In 1934, he immigrated to Palestine, becoming a leading rabbinic scholar and editor of the Talmudic Encyclopedia.]] was appointed secretary of the committee. He lobbied the Soviet Bar Association for clarification on the issue of religious schooling. During the 1920s, the government policy seemed to be constantly shifting, at times permitting religious activity and at other times forbidding it. The Yevesektzia, on the other hand, pursued the destruction of Judaism with zeal and were often more hostile than officially necessary. It was on this inconsistency that the Rebbe capitalized, arguing that Soviet Russia permitted freedom of religion and that the campaign against Judaism was propelled solely by the Jewish Communists exceeding their mandate. The eventual legal ruling stated that Russian law permitted private religious instruction at home for up to six children. With this clarification in hand, the Rabbinical Committee defended the teachers who were being prosecuted by local courts. In 1923, when the People’s Commiserate of Justice proposed closing the loopholes allowing religious home instruction, the Committee once again successfully lobbied to block the change. “Despite this victory,” the Rebbe wrote in July 1923 to the leaders of Agudath Israel in the United States, “there is still much harassment by local authorities on religious homeschooling.”[[93: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter dated July 12, 1923 (28 Tamuz 5763).]] Galvanizing the financial resources to sustain the growing education system and help Russian Jews was a daunting task. Some money could be raised in Russia, but other sources were needed. The Rebbe established a strong bond with Dr. Joseph Rosen, the JDC representative in Russia, who was able to direct some funds to the Rebbe for educational projects. There were also allocations to support job training in home-based industries to give Jews who had moved into cities the ability to earn a dignified livelihood. Within the Jewish community, there were some who resented the Rebbe’s leadership and tried to disrupt the JDC funding. Communist officials also wanted the support to be withheld. Still, Rosen’s admiration for the Rebbe helped overcome the critics, and the JDC did provide some assistance.[[94: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter dated November 10, 1927.]] The Rebbe’s situation in Rostov was proving tenuous. Returning from meetings in Moscow in 1924, he was met outside the city by his secretary, Rabbi Elchonon Morozov, with ominous news: The Yevesektzia had searched his house while he was away. One of the Chasidim had overheard the officers saying, “When Schneersohn arrives, we’ll arrest him and send him to exile.” The Rebbe returned to Moscow for ten days and then traveled back to Rostov. Within hours, the house was surrounded. “They did an extensive search and asked many questions. The search ended at four a.m., and at that point they wanted to take me to jail.” Only the intervention of some influential locals prevented the search and questioning from ending in an arrest.[[95: Ibid.]] Clearly, Rostov could not continue to provide a haven for the Rebbe, so the decision was made to relocate to Leningrad (now St. Petersburg), where there was a large Jewish community. As the historical capital of Russia, it became the center of many Jewish organizations, and its community was accustomed to representing all of Russian Jewry before the government.[[96: Debate about the Congress of Jewish Religious Communities in the USSR in 1925–26, Michael Beizer and Anatoli Karasev, published by Jews in Russia and Eastern Europe, summer 2003, Hebrew University of Jerusalem.]] The Rebbe rented a large apartment in the center of the city. “The Rebbe’s apartment was located on the corner of two of Leningrad’s most prominent streets: Machovaya and Fantilamanskaya. The previous tenant had been a member of the nobility,” described Rabbi Eliyahu Chaim Althaus. “It is, thank G-d, a spacious and beautiful dwelling, with seven windows looking onto Fantilamanskaya Street, ten onto Machovaya Street, and one overlooking the corner, at an angle. The room in which they prayed and where the Rebbe said chasidut was an expansive room, similar to the hall in Lubavitch.” There was no official permit for prayer assemblies, Althaus pointed out. “The entire thing was sustained by a miracle.”[[97: The apartment had belonged to the baron from Kass, the governor of the Bessarabia region. In his own handwriting, the baron signed over the dwelling and much of its furniture to the Rebbe. In June 1924, the baron was compelled, according to Soviet law, to leave Leningrad and was banished to one of the remote cities of exile. A letter written by Althaus, dated May 1928, appears in Rabbi Dr. Alter B. Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle: The Arrest and Liberation of Rabbi Yosef Y. Schneersohn of Lubavitch in Soviet Russia (Kehot Publication Society, 1999), 286–87. Althaus wrote, “Until this day many of the baron’s furnishings remain in the Rebbe’s dwelling.”]] Leningrad’s chief rabbi was Rabbi David Tevel Katzenellenbogen, whom the Rebbe knew well and greatly respected. The Rebbe’s arrival added a new dimension to the community. As Professor Michael Beizer writes,[[98: Beizer notes that the other objects of focus were Lev Gurewicz, the leader of LERO (Leningrad Religious Community), and the city’s rabbi, David Tevel Katzenellenbogen.]] “The other main focus of Jewish religious life in Leningrad of the mid-1920s was the Chabad leader: Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn.” The semipublic activities of the Rabbinical Committee, while they did have an impact, were clearly not enough to overcome the onslaught from the Yevesektzia. To create a long-term counterweight, a new approach was needed to operate against the government in total secrecy, something that would stand the test of time and ensure a future for Soviet Jewry. That’s where the second strategy came in. While the work of the Rabbinical Committee gained steam, the Rebbe began to lay the foundation for a simultaneous clandestine endeavor. In November 1923, on the chasidic holiday of 19 Kislev,[[99: The nineteenth of the Jewish month of Kislev is the anniversary of the founder of Chabad, Rabbi Schneur Zalman, being liberated from czarist prison in 1798. The day is celebrated in Jewish communities worldwide. The farbrengen of 19 Kislev is described in the memoirs of Rabbi Michael Yehuda Cohen, cited in Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 10. Also see Sefer HaSichos, 5680–87 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2020), 55–58.]] the Rebbe spoke to his Chasidim in Rostov about the need to send emissaries to every city to “establish places of study – to gather children and hire teachers.” Some of those present volunteered, and the Rebbe responded by saying that he would make a pact with them. A few months later, in the winter of 1924, the Rebbe formalized his plan. He called a confidential meeting of nine of his Chasidim in Moscow to establish a “secret covenant,” applying the Hebrew term kritat brit that G-d used when He made a covenant with Avraham promising a unique destiny for the Jewish people. Like Avraham, this group was entering unknown and stormy territory. Avraham’s mission was to bring monotheism to a world steeped in idolatry. The small nucleus of Chasidim who gathered in Moscow that winter night were attempting to preserve belief in G-d in an atheistic state that was willing to use force to impose its view. Years later, the Rebbe described that meeting in Moscow.[[100: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 10; Sefer HaSichos, 5702, 154.]] “The decrees against Torah students and Jewish schools had begun. Nine temimim [students or alumni of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim] gathered in Moscow, and I completed the quorum of ten. We swore an oath to continue defiantly fortifying Judaism under the Soviet regime, even if it reached mesirat nefesh, sacrificing our lives to the last drop of blood.” The Rebbe went on to describe the gravity of the situation. “Classes had to be held in hiding, in cellars – not cellars like in America, but simply dungeons dug into the ground. They were cold, without fire, without windows.” And the fear was palpable. “If they were caught, the teachers were cruelly tortured and exiled, the children were tormented, and others were shot.” The nine were committed to never revealing that they were part of the secret covenant. Thirty-six years later, in 1960 in Brooklyn, the seventh Rebbe turned to Rabbi Bentzion Shemtov during a chasidic gathering, and asked, “Did you make a kritat brit, a covenant, with my father-in-law the Rebbe, or not?” Shemtov was clearly conflicted. He felt beholden to the promise he made to the Rebbe Rayatz never to reveal the members of the secret group. Three times the seventh Rebbe asked and still, Shemtov remained silent, never breaking his solemn oath.[[101: Author’s interview with Rabbi Yehudah Leib Schapiro, who witnessed the interaction between the seventh Rebbe and Rabbi Shemtov.]] These men became generals in the secret army that was fielded across the breadth of Russia. They led their fellow Chasidim in organizing a clandestine network of elementary schools, yeshivas, synagogues, and mikvehs that lasted until the fall of the Soviet Union. Funding was raised locally and funneled from abroad. The underground operation succeeded. A confidential 1926 report[[102: “Aide-Memoire About Religious Education in Russia,” confidential, July 3, 1926, JDC Archives.]] from Russia sent to the JDC in New York stated that some fifteen thousand children were being educated in a growing number of secret schools operated by the Rebbe’s network. “In Moscow alone,” reads the report, “we have three hundred children studying in small groups of three.[[103: The report focused on children and noted that there were additional older students in secret yeshivas in eight cities, including remote Kutaisi in Soviet Georgia, a clear result of Simon Jacobson’s activities. Jacobson was one of the nine temimim at the Rebbe’s meeting in Moscow.]] They hide in cellars, and in the summertime, they go out to the woods.” The report explained that each teacher was paid thirty rubles a month, and another thirty rubles was paid to each watchman required to keep an eye out for authorities. “If a teacher is arrested, thirty rubles are needed to support his family while he is imprisoned. Though the teachers and children know the danger, they heroically take all risks for their education.” Despite the intense level of secrecy demanded by the Rebbe, the identities of a few of the original quorum are known, including Elchonon Dov Morozov, Bentzion Shemtov, and Simon Yakovshvili ( Jacobson).[[104: A fourth whose identity is known is Rabbi Yerachmiel Binyaminson, who was the rabbi in the town of Shchedrin and later Zlobin.]] Two had been students at the Rebbe Rashab’s yeshivah in the town of Lubavitch, and the third hailed from the remote province of Georgia and studied in Rostov. None of the three came from Chabad families, though Shemtov had an ancestral connection to Chabad. Each was passionately loyal to the Rebbe and willingly put his life on the line for Judaism. Yakovshvili served a decade in Russian prisons and Shemtov spent three years in Siberia until they escaped to the West in the postwar period. Morozov, who coordinated the network after the Rebbe left Russia in 1927, was exiled to Siberia and later shot by a Russian firing squad. They each left behind large, Torah-observant families, and today many of their descendants are Chabad emissaries across the globe. The stories of these three Chasidim represent the experiences of the rest of the members of the network. Shemtov, the youngest of the four, was born in 1902.[[105: Unpublished biography of Rabbi Bentzion Shemtov.]] His father was an affluent lumber merchant in Druya, northern Belorussia, where Jews made up some forty percent of the town’s four thousand residents. His mother had lost multiple pregnancies and so, while pregnant with him, she traveled 180 miles to Lubavitch for a blessing from the Rebbe Rashab to bear a healthy child. The Rebbe assured her that the birth would be fine and suggested naming the child Bentzion. Winds of change blowing in Druya were promoting secularism, and to protect young Bentzion, his mother brought him to the yeshivah in Lubavitch when he was just twelve years old, making him one of its youngest students. His subsequent siblings, who did not attend the yeshivah, did not end up fully observant. Young Bentzion, a child from an affluent family,[[106: His parents had given him a jacket with beautiful buttons that each hid a diamond. Realizing that the yeshivah needed financial support, he gave the diamonds to the Rebbe. Author’s interview with Rabbi Kasriel Sudak, grandson of Rabbi Shemtov.]] found himself in a small town where the prime values were the pursuit of Jewish scholarship and spirituality. He developed a passionate loyalty to the Rebbe Rashab and the next two successive Rebbes. After taking the oath of the covenant with the Rebbe, Shemtov was dispatched to Volhynia, the northwestern region of Ukraine. There were few Chasidim living there, but the Rebbe was not concerned only with his followers, but with all the Jews of Russia. Shemtov visited dozens of communities and spoke in the remaining synagogues, promoting Jewish education for the youth. In numerous communities, he successfully set up schools and encouraged the synagogues to be kept open. In March of 1927, Shemtov was in Korosten in western Ukraine. The secret police discovered his activities and his involvement in the Rabbinical Conference held there. They arrested him and transported him to Kharkiv, where he was jailed for a month, until Passover, and then released. But his freedom did not last long. Three months later, in June, on the same day that the Rebbe was arrested in Leningrad, Shemtov was detained in Kharkiv. He was held for another thirty days and grilled about the clandestine Chabad system in Russia. He never revealed any information and was eventually released pending trial. Between arrests, Shemtov became engaged to Esther Golda Futerfus. Her brother Reb Mendel, a legendary figure in the Chabad underground, suggested the match, as their father had passed away years earlier. With the new trial looming, the wedding date was delayed.[[107: She went to live with her uncle in Moscow until Shemtov was paroled. Interview with Esther Golda’s daughter, Fradel Sudak, available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zRjSI2CUDc0.]] Then Shemtov was sentenced to exile in Siberia for three years. In the summer of 1930, his bride made the long trek to Siberia to meet him, and finally, in September, in the small village of Yanivskiek about fifty miles from the Trans-Siberian railroad, they celebrated their wedding. Lacking a mikveh, Esther Golda hacked through an icy Siberian river to immerse in its frigid waters. They had no ring for the wedding ceremony, so Shemtov fashioned one out of a silver fork.[[108: Interview with his grandson, Rabbi Kasriel Shemtov of Jerusalem.]] Rabbi Shmuel Levitin, a noted chasidic rabbi who had also been exiled to Siberia for promoting Judaism, officiated. After being released from Siberia, Shemtov returned to central Russia, living in Kharkiv and then Moscow. After the German invasion, the couple made their way to remote Uzbekistan, settling in Tashkent. In 1947, Shemtov and his family were able to leave Russia on false Polish passports as part of the secret escape organized by Chabad Chasidim after the war.[[109: In late 1946 and early 1947, Chabad Chasidim in Russia organized an audacious escape of some one thousand Chasidim. See chap. 11 of this book; David Eliezrie, The Secret of Chabad, chap. 4.]] In 1948, the Shemtovs were sent by the Rebbe to England, where they worked to build the Chabad community there. At the end of his life, Shemtov moved to Israel, where he established Machon Levi Yitzchak, an organization dedicated to publishing the talks of the seventh Rebbe in Hebrew. He passed away in Israel in 1975 at the age of seventy-two. The second member of the quorum, Simon Yakovshvili, was born in 1900 and raised in Kutaisi in Soviet Georgia, some 1,200 miles south of Moscow. The local Jewish community was steeped in tradition but lacked rabbis and scholars, so in 1916, community leaders turned to the Rebbe Rashab for assistance. He dispatched Rabbi Shmuel Levitin, among other rabbis, to establish a yeshivah for the Sephardic Jews.[[110: The Rebbe sent Rabbis Shmuel Levitin, Avraham Slavin, Nachum Sasonkin, Mordechai Perlow, and Yisrael Zuber, among others, to the region. Today, many rabbis in the Georgian community are educated in Chabad institutions. For more information, see Rabbi Zusha Wolf, Admorei Chabad VeYahadut Bukhara (Lod, Israel: Machon LeSefer, 2016).]] But Yakovshvili never studied in the Chabad yeshivah in his home province. His first encounter with Chabad was in Rostov. In 1918, on his way to study in Italy, having received a scholarship for agricultural studies, Yakovshvili stopped in Rostov for Rosh HaShanah. “He was a tall, handsome eighteen-year-old,” shared his grandson, Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Jacobson.[[111: Interview with Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Jacobson available at: https://jewsyoushouldknow.libsyn.com/episode-137-the-truth-sayer-rabbi-a-conversation-with-yy-jacobson.]] “He walked into the synagogue sporting distinct Georgian dress, with yellow shoes, a white jacket, and a little bowtie.” Not knowing the proper protocol, and standing out because of his unusual garb, he annoyed some of the Chasidim by brazenly pushing his way to the bimah to stand near the Rebbe as he sounded the shofar.[[112: The high point of Rosh HaShanah is the sounding of the shofar. The Rebbe’s shofar blowing was a profoundly spiritual moment, and Chasidim attempted to stand as close as possible to experience it personally. Shemtov biography, unpublished.]] The Rayatz signaled to them not to interfere. After the holiday, he had a private meeting with the Rebbe Rashab. Jacobson says his grandfather could not speak Yiddish, so the Rebbe spoke in Hebrew, telling him, “You will arrive in Italy when the right time comes. What is important for you now is to learn Torah, to know what it really means to be a Jew.” Yakovshvili was moved by the conversation, and he took the Rebbe’s advice. Eventually, he completed his rabbinic ordination and became certified as both a shochet (kosher slaughterer) and a mohel (circumciser). After Yakovshvili took the oath in Moscow, the Rebbe sent him back to his home province. Russian rule in the remote province was not as oppressive, and the Georgian Jews were known for their fierce independence. Yakovshvili strengthened the existing Jewish schools and opened new ones. Unfortunately, his inspiring talks caught the attention of the authorities, and he was imprisoned and eventually freed. In a cryptic letter to friends written in rabbinic Hebrew to circumvent the censors, he said, “I had an astonishing miracle.” Yakovshvili’s success alarmed Yevesektzia leader Moshe Litvakov.[[113: Moshe Litvakov (1875/80–1939) was the editor of the Yevesektzia newspaper, Der Emes. He was killed in the purges of Stalin. For more, see Gennady Estraikh, “Litvakov, Moyshe,” available at: https://yivoencyclopedia.org/article.aspx/Litvakov_Moyshe; Zvi Gitelman, Jewish Nationality and Soviet Politics (Princeton Press, 1972), index, “Levitikov.”]] At a meeting with fellow activists in St. Petersburg in 1927, Litvakov complained,[[114: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, 76.]] “In every part of the country – not just White Russia but even in remote provinces like Georgia and Turkistan – his [the Rayatz’s] followers are there preserving religious life.” He described his visit to one town in Soviet Georgia, where he was informed by local Jews that a representative of the Rayatz, referring to Yakovshvili, was residing in their town. They said that the representative spoke their language and had provided funding to repair the local mikveh. Litvakov lamented bitterly to his audience in Moscow, “Jewish leaders in Tbilisi presented me with a petition to reopen the local synagogue, all because of Schneersohn and his representative.”[[115: Yakovshvili’s impact, together with the yeshivas that had been opened earlier, lasted for decades. When Georgian Jews began immigrating to Israel in the early 1970s, many chose to join communities established by Chabad in Lod and Kiryat Malachi. While maintaining their unique traditions, many of them remain dedicated Chabad Chasidim. Today, the synagogues and Jewish schools in the former Soviet province are operated by Chabad. In 2019, a forty-thousand-square-foot educational center was dedicated to serve the needs of the province’s four thousand Jews. See http://www.oravner.ge/ (Or Avner school); https://www.timesofisrael.com/tbilisis-jewish-community-keeps-active-with-israeli-tourists-and-chabad-meal (Times of Israel); and http://www.5tjt.com/chabad-dedicates-jewish-educational-complex-in-tbilisi-georgia/ (5 Towns Jewish Times).]] Yakovshvili eventually relocated to Moscow. In August of 1937, armed men burst into his home and arrested him. He was accused of being a counterrevolutionary and initially sentenced to twenty-five years in exile. Years later, at a meeting of rabbis in Toronto in 1952, he described the harsh interrogation he endured. “They gave me a list of one hundred men, women, and children who they said were also counterrevolutionaries, telling me that if I confirmed and signed that it was true, I would go free.”[[116: Shemtov biography, unpublished.]] Yakovshvili refused to inform on fellow Jews, sealing his own fate. He suffered terrible torture during the ten years he was imprisoned. He was flogged repeatedly, his wounds lasting for life. Finally, he received a death sentence. From prison he sent an appeal to Lavrentiy Beria, head of Stalin’s dreaded secret police, who also hailed from Georgia. Yakovshvili hoped he would show mercy to a fellow countryman. Minutes before his scheduled execution, Yakovshvili asked for a few moments to pray. As he was uttering what he thought would be his last prayers, an edict arrived from Beria sparing his life. For almost three years after his arrest, Yakovshvili’s family had no idea where he was. His wife tirelessly searched for him. They nearly lost hope, to the point that many assumed him dead.[[117: “The Life and Legacy of Gershon Jacobson,” video available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5gC3YI8MAYs.]] Despite this, the family held tightly to their beliefs and Jewish observance, and his two sons continued attending a secret yeshivah at night, after public school. When news finally reached them that Simon was alive, the family was joyously surprised. After nine years in the Soviet gulag, Yakovshvili was released. His son Gershon says, “His back was broken, his beard was white. He didn’t recognize me, and I didn’t recognize him.” Shortly thereafter, the Yakovshvili family fled Russia following the same escape route as Shemtov, masquerading as Polish refugees and changing their name from Yakovshvili to the more Polish-sounding Jacobson. In 1952, the Jacobsons immigrated to Toronto, where Simon was appointed rabbi of the local Chabad congregation. However, “he was worn out from years of suffering,” says his grandson Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Jacobson. In June 1953, he passed away at the age of fifty-three. His wife followed him two years later, leaving three orphaned boys, ages six, twelve, and fourteen. The most well-known member of the group of ten was Rabbi Elchonon (Chonye) Morozov. When the Tomchei Temimim yeshivah was established in Lubavitch in 1897, a small select group of outstanding scholars were chosen as its first students. Morozov, born in 1877 to a religious family, was one of them. He originally studied in Minsk and then went to Lubavitch to pursue chasidic teachings. He excelled in his studies to the point that the Rebbe Rashab chose him as the personal study partner for his son, the Rayatz. He eventually joined the yeshivah faculty. The Rebbe Rashab soon drafted Morozov as his personal secretary, and he continued in the same role for the Rayatz. This put him at the center of the Rebbe’s secret campaign in Russia, and indeed, Morozov was one of the first Chasidim to be arrested and sent to Siberia for a three-year sentence in 1927. He was a role model to others, displaying great self-sacrifice. Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson quotes his famous saying about the tribulations of Chasidim in Russia: “A year in prison is an obligation; two years is a hiddur mitzvah (beautification of a mitzvah).” Morozov’s personal life was marred by hardship. In 1915, his wife passed away, leaving him with five children. He later married her cousin and had four more children, one of whom passed away at a young age. Two of his daughters[[118: His daughter Rachel was born in Lubavitch in 1906; her younger sister was Sara. They both escaped the Soviet Union in 1946 and moved to Israel. Although they were not personally observant, they maintained a close relationship with their family.]] were drawn from religious observance by the lure of secular Zionism. This created tensions in the family, and at one point he told one of his daughters to leave the home, fearing that she would negatively influence the others. The Rebbe intervened, telling Morozov that it was inappropriate for a father to evict his child from her home. The Rebbe showed a special concern for this daughter by visiting her in the hospital when she was ill. Morozov’s two daughters were imprisoned at the same time that he was – they for their Zionist activities and he for his work for the Rebbe. When his daughters learned that he was being mistreated, they declared a hunger strike in prison until his conditions were improved. When the Rebbe left Russia in 1927, Morozov became the lead organizer of the secret network. But he too wished to leave Russia. At one point it seemed possible to get a visa for Palestine, but the door closed on him before the needed funds were procured. Beginning in 1930, Morozov hid from the authorities in Leningrad, using false papers that identified him as Berke Pesner. Finally, in 1938, the long arm of the secret police caught him and his son Shmuel. They tortured Shmuel, asking him to verify that his father was indeed Elchonon Morozov. He refused to answer, understanding what his father’s fate would be if his true identity was revealed. Morozov cried out, “Shmuel, tell them that I am your father!” Shortly afterward, Shmuel took his last breath, and the interrogators informed Morozov that he was to be put to death. “Your crime,” the police told him, “is being a representative of the Lubavitcher Rebbe, who is G-d’s representative in Russia.” Morozov was murdered by a firing squad.[[119: Barbara Bensoussan, “Tunisia’s Russian Jewish Leader,” available at: chabad.org/1163700.]] The life journeys of the other men who took the oath, and the members of the network they began, follow similar paths as those of Shemtov, Yakovshvili, and Morozov. Many of them and their recruits were imprisoned in the Siberian gulag. Some were killed, and almost all were harassed by the secret police. Few emerged from the experience unscathed. The Rebbe himself was constantly at odds with the Yevesektzia, acting surreptitiously to evade them. In February 1927, he had a close call while on a trip to Moscow to meet representatives of the JDC. “The plans for my trip were known only to my wife and to my confidant, Chonye Morozov,” the Rebbe wrote in his diary.[[120: Likkutei Dibburim (English), vol. 6, chap. 63; excerpt from the Rebbe’s diary from Adar, 5687, February–March 1927, printed in Sefer HaSichos, 5680–87, 128–58; “Appendix: Moscow, 1927” from the diary of Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak of Lubavitch, available at: chabad.org/2221.]] Arriving at the train station, he waited in the taxi until just a few minutes before the train’s departure, then dashed through the station and immediately entered his compartment. He remained there for the duration of the trip so as not to draw the attention of patrols. “I heard that the Yevesektzia had requested that the GPU (secret police) monitor my travels in an attempt to find evidence against me.” But the man in the next compartment did notice the Rebbe, and the next morning, as they neared Moscow, he knocked on his door. He introduced himself as Mark Semyonovitch Bashkov, chairman of the Soviet Council of Chelyabinsk, a province in southern Russia, and a member of the OGPU (secret police).[[121: This would make him the equivalent of a governor of a US state and apparently a member of the executive committee of the OGPU, the Soviet secret police.]] He said that the Rebbe was greatly respected in his home, and they agreed to meet in three days’ time at the Rebbe’s hotel. When the Rebbe checked into the hotel in Moscow, he tipped the staff generously and asked them to send a message to his home in Leningrad saying that “Yosef Chaim is well” – Yosef being the Rebbe’s first name and Chaim signifying life. The message indicated that the Rebbe was alive and well. Shortly after midnight, the Rebbe heard a knock on his door but did not answer. A few minutes later, the phone rang. The hotel manager was on the line asking the Rebbe to open the door because he had something vital to tell him. “Fifteen minutes ago, a Yevesektzia official arrived at the hotel asking if Rabbi Schneersohn had checked in.” The official told the hotel manager that the Rebbe had left Moscow the day before and that he had been searching for him the whole day so that he could arrest him. “I told him that citizen Schneersohn had not arrived,” the manager told the Rebbe. “He gave me his phone number and told me to call him the moment he arrives.” The manager hurriedly smuggled the Rebbe out the kitchen entrance and escorted him to the Bolshoi Moskovsky Hotel, where his friend was the manager. Finally, at 3:30 a.m., the Rebbe settled in at the second hotel. The Rebbe wrote in his diary, “The manager here knows I am hiding from the Yevesektzia and gave me instructions on how to leave the hotel through a side exit.” During that visit in Moscow, the Rebbe met with Dr. Rosen, the JDC representative in Russia. They discussed the Rebbe’s initiative to train Jews for home-based industries, which the JDC was partially supporting. The Rebbe also met with chasidic activists, always careful to keep out of the public eye. On Wednesday evening, Bashkov, the Soviet official who had met the Rebbe on the train, came to visit and shared his story. “My father was a teacher in Orsha [a city in Belorussia],” he began. His grandparents had been Chasidim of the Alter Rebbe, Chabad’s founder. His grandfather had been an ardent follower of the Tzemach Tzedek, the third Rebbe. “He was involved with Jewish schools and he was arrested by Czar Nicholas.”[[122: Nicholas I of Russia was czar from 1825–55. In 1827, he instituted the Cantonist system of up to twenty-five years of compulsory military service for Jewish children. He aligned himself with the leaders of the Haskalah (secular Enlightenment), challenging the traditional Jewish educational system in Russia.]] Bashkov studied in yeshivah until the age of fourteen, but he felt that yeshivah studies were not for him, and he returned home. “Eventually, I could not accept the rules at home and left for Warsaw, where I joined the Socialists.” In the years to come, he pursued an education in England before returning to Russia. There he rose to prominence, becoming chairman of the Russian Provincial Government in Chelyabinsk and a member of the board that oversaw the secret police. He told the Rebbe that after his mother’s passing, he decided to visit his father in Orsha. It had been twenty years since he had been home. When he arrived, he found his father living with a friend. “He was bent over and weak and did not recognize me.” Seeing an official, his father asked, “Have you come to arrest me again? Please let me recover from my illness first.” He corrected his father, saying, “It’s me, your son Meir,” and asked him to come to Moscow, where he would care for him. At first, his father did not even want to speak with him. Then he said, “Once, teachers were needed to instruct children. Now they are put in jail and beaten.” Bashkov attempted to placate his father and offered him money, but his father refused, saying, “I have what I need.” What Bashkov did not know, the Rebbe wrote in his diary later, was that his family was active in the Rebbe’s underground. “His father Shimon and his uncle Aryeh Shlomo are teachers in Orsha, and his uncle Menachem Shmuel (Ragolin) is a teacher in Yekaterinoslav. All of them receive a salary from our center.” As Bashkov was telling his story, they heard a pounding at the door. In burst three men, one a police officer, two carrying guns. One of them, named Krotov, proclaimed: “Citizen Schneersohn, you are under arrest! Do not move or we will shoot you.” The Rebbe remained stoic, having endured harassment from the Yevesektzia many times. Bashkov was also silent. As they searched the Rebbe’s luggage, Krotov gleefully told the Rebbe what he did to two rabbis in his hometown of Amskislav: “We harnessed them to a wagon and ordered them to pull it. The older one stumbled and died the same day, and the younger one died two days later.” At that point Krotov turned to Bashkov, demanding to search him, too. Bashkov told them that the search was illegal. Krotov exploded in rage. “I am a member of the Yevesektzia and I am responsible for the surveillance of this hotel,” he said. He demanded to see Bashkov’s documents. “We will find a place for you in the dungeons of Lubyanka Street [the notorious Russian prison],” he threatened. Bashkov then presented documents revealing him to be a senior member of the OGPU. The Rebbe writes, “Krotov’s face turned white. They all recoiled and stood like blocks of wood, as if thunderstruck.” The three men fled the scene. Afterward, Bashkov attempted to console the Rebbe. “This is an overreaction of young people who lack judgment.” There were some officials who acted with greater consideration as Bashkov did, partly out of nostalgia for their own family backgrounds. Still, the Yevesektzia had a free hand in pushing the Soviet anti-religious policy to the edge. After this incident, the Rebbe returned safely to Leningrad. Throughout the Soviet Union, many Chasidim put their lives on the line to sustain Jewish life and educate the next generation. The Rebbe’s unflinching efforts not only put himself at risk, but them too. How could the Rebbe put his Chasidim in danger? There are several points to consider. First, the Rebbe viewed it as a sacred mission entrusted to him by his father just a few weeks before his passing. As he reflected poignantly in his personal diary during the Moscow visit in 1926: “Whenever I feel disheartened, I reflect on this moment. I recall that Friday when the Rebbe [Rashab] spoke terrifying words to me.”[[123: Diary entry dated 10 Adar Alef, 5787 (February 10, 1927). While on a mission to Moscow, he was harassed by the Yevesektzia. He writes that he woke up at 3 a.m. troubled by events in Moscow. After reflecting on this meeting with his father, he writes, “I went back to sleep, and my soul was relaxed.” Sefer HaSichos, 5680–87 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society), 132.]] His father’s bold message, that he would have to stand up to the Communists and put his life on the line and “that eventually the Soviet Union would collapse,” remained at the forefront of the Rebbe’s mind. Clearly, he felt that in order to succeed in the mission entrusted to him, it was imperative that he enlist others, despite the risk that entailed. A second explanation is given by Rabbi Yehuda Leib Schapiro, dean of the Rabbinical College of Greater Miami. “The very future of Judaism in Russia was at stake,” he says. Russia was then home to one of the largest Jewish communities in the world. Schapiro says that the Rebbe knew that if they did not act radically, Jewish religious life was doomed to die out under the Communist regime. Thus, even when some Chasidim had the opportunity to leave Russia in the 1920s, the Rebbe urged them to stay and continue their holy work. Schapiro adds that for the Rebbe himself, this was heart-wrenching. “He had a great love toward every one of his students, and putting them at risk pained him deeply.” That was made clear to Rabbi Simcha Gorodetsky[[124: Simcha Gorodetsky (1903–1984) studied in the yeshivah in Rostov and Kherson. As a young man, he was an emissary of the Rebbe in Russia; after his marriage in 1926 he was sent to remote Bukhara, where he opened Jewish schools. He was arrested and sentenced to twenty-five years of hard labor in the artic in 1946. He was released in 1956 after the death of Stalin and permitted to leave Russia in 1964. His family joined him two years later.]] when he met with the Rebbe to report on a mission to cities in Russia, Azerbaijan, and Bukhara[[125: Hillel Zaltzman, Samarkand: The Underground with a Far-Reaching Impact (Brooklyn, New York: Chamah, 2015), chap. 4.]] in the mid-1920s. He hesitated in sharing the desperate situations of some of the Chasidim. The Rebbe told him, “Nu, nu, continue. As my emissary, you must tell me everything.” Gorodetsky shared the difficulties he had observed. Suddenly the Rebbe burst into tears. Gorodetsky stood in stunned silence, witnessing the Rebbe’s anguish. When he left the Rebbe’s room, he met the Rebbe’s mother, Rebbetzin Shterna Sara. Seeing his distraught face, she asked him, “Why do you look so pale?” He told her what had just occurred and how the Rebbe had begun to cry. She whispered to him, “I don’t know what happened today, but sometimes I enter his room after yechidut and I see the floor soaked with tears.”[[126: Ibid.]] Third, there was historical precedent for this kind of strategy. Rabbi Mendel Gluckowsky, a member of the Chabad Rabbinical Court in Israel, points to the revolt of the Maccabees against the powerful Syrian-Greek Empire in the second century BCE. “A small group of poorly armed faithful Jews courageously stood up to the oppression, even confronting the Hellenist Jews who had accepted the Syrian-Greek culture and were working with them.” Quoting a talk that the seventh Rebbe once gave to a group of children,[[127: Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, Likkutei Sichot (Kehot Publication Society, 1982), 20:480.]] he says, “The goal of the Greeks was to get the Jews to forget the Torah. And just as the Maccabees stood up to the Greeks and the Hellenists, so did the Rebbe stand up to the Communists and the Yevesektzia.”[[128: Interview with the author.]] During a late night farbrengen in 1974, the seventh Rebbe spoke with great passion about the dilemma that the Rebbe faced.[[129: Farbrengen, 10 Shevat, 5734 (February 2, 1974). An excerpt of the talk can be found in Likkutei Sichot 18:304.]] “The Rebbe [Rayatz] had actual self-sacrifice. If it was for a small thing or a larger one, no matter what, in that country [Russia], when you upheld a Jewish tradition you put your life on the line.” As he spoke of the Rebbe’s anguish, the seventh Rebbe cried. “When you send someone on a mission that is full of danger, it’s much more difficult than putting yourself at risk. And then the person you sent is arrested and exiled.” Faced with a quandary over whether to continue or to stop, the Rebbe acted fearlessly. “Then the next day you acted again with self-sacrifice and sent another who has to put his life on the line in place of the one who was arrested.” Rabbi Simon Jacobson’s son Sholom, who was orphaned at age six because of his father’s activism, insists that the Chasidim who took the oath of the Rebbe’s secret covenant and the hundreds of others who joined the effort in Russia “wore it as a badge of honor.” This sentiment is echoed by Rabbi Moishe Levertov in his memoir about his father, Rabbi DovBer Levertov.[[130: Moishe Levertov, “The Man Who Mocked the KGB,” available at: chabad.org/312429.]] Rabbi DovBer grew up in the Chabad underground and died in the gulags in 1947, where he was sent because of his activism. “Although my years in the USSR were full of terror and persecution, in a sense they were the most satisfying years of my life – not to be exchanged for anything in the world. Every moment had a sense of living for a higher ideal, an inspiring feeling difficult to evoke under our present conditions of plenty.” Moishe’s son, Rabbi Berel Levertov, the Chabad emissary in Santa Fe, New Mexico, reflected on the life of the grandfather he never met and for whom he is named. “My grandfather never hesitated to do what was needed – brit milah (circumcision), kosher slaughter – no matter the great personal risk. When his children had escaped the Soviet Union and were out of danger, he redoubled his efforts. He felt that he now had nothing to fear and nothing to lose.”[[131: Interview with the author.]] Rabbi Berel’s daughter Mussi Sharfstein was raised in Santa Fe and today is a Jewish educator in Miami Beach, Florida. She reflected on her great-grandfather’s sacrifice, losing his life to Stalin’s henchmen because of his commitment to the Rebbe’s work in Russia. “My great-grandfather’s staunch, unwavering dedication instilled in his descendants the importance of a life of Yiddishkeit and of keeping it alive for others. He refused to compromise even one iota in his Torah observance, insisting on maintaining Yiddishkeit and Chasidut under the most difficult conditions. This commitment still reverberates three generations later and motivates me in my life today.”[[132: Interview with the author.]] Based in Leningrad, the Rebbe operated throughout Russia, and for a while, the city provided a haven from the Yevesektzia. But it would not last. An initiative of Jewish communal leaders in St. Petersburg, secretly backed by the Yevesektzia, led to the Rebbe’s arrest and exile from Russia. The central Jewish communal organization at the time was the Leningrad Jewish Religious Community (LERO), formally recognized by the government in 1925. Standing at its helm was Lev Gurewicz.[[133: Lev Gurewicz (1876–1943) graduated from the University of St. Petersburg with a law degree. Michael Beizer writes that during Gurewicz’s high school years, he was carried away by the ideas of the Enlightenment and subsequently by Zionism as well. He served as chairman of the Zionist Organization of Russia and was arrested in 1929. See debate about the Congress of Jewish Religious Communities in the USSR in 1925–26, Michael Beizer and Anatoli Karasev, published by Jews in Russia and Eastern Europe, summer 2003, Hebrew University of Jerusalem.]] He was a dynamic leader, an avid Zionist and active in the Enlightenment. Gurewicz’s aspirations for communal leadership were not limited to Leningrad and included a plan to gain more power by uniting all of Russian Jewry in a congress. In the summer of 1925, Gurewicz met the Rebbe for the first time[[134: Rabbi Eliyahu Chaim Althaus (1870–1941) was a devoted Chasid of the Rebbe Rayatz who studied in Lubavitch and was killed by the Nazis in Riga. He wrote a long account of the conflict over the proposed Leningrad Jewish Conference in a series of letters to family members in 1928. He participated in many of the meetings and presents a remarkable firsthand description. Reprinted in Likkutei Dibburim, vol. 6 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2012). Excerpts available at: chabad.org/82517. The Hebrew original is printed in Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, 79–93.]] and suggested that he partner with him and LERO in creating a national conference the following year that would include all elements of Russian Jewish life. Gurewicz believed that this was politically achievable; the government had sanctioned a similar convention of Christian leaders in Moscow. He assured the Rebbe that although he was not personally observant,[[135: Rabbi Althaus writes that Gurewicz had a limited Jewish education, attended secular high school, and earned a law degree. He describes him as “vehemently anti-religious.”]] he was working in cooperation with the chief rabbi of Leningrad, the renowned scholar Rabbi David Katzenellenbogen,[[136: Rabbi David Katzenellenbogen (1850–1930) was a student of Rabbi Yisrael Salanter, founder of the Musar movement. In 1908, he became rabbi of St. Petersburg’s Choral Synagogue, and he also helped open more synagogues in the city. He was a great scholar but not a Chasid. The Rebbe had a profound respect for him and, according to Rabbi Althaus, until the conflict over the conference, they were of “one opinion on any matter involving religion.” At the time, he was seventy-five, and Rabbi Althaus speculates that age had weakened him, and he put too much faith in other people who may have attempted to mislead him.]] who was deeply respected by the Rebbe. The Rebbe sat silently as Gurewicz presented his initiative. The response he offered was lukewarm: “I am sure your intentions are noble, but at first thought, I am against it.” The Rebbe explained that while the issue required further contemplation, it seemed that there were too many risks[[137: According to the Althaus account of the meeting, the Rebbe did not mention the specific risks. It could be that he was referring to the fact that Gurewicz wanted to change the communal structure the Rebbe had developed by replacing the rabbis who were currently at the helm with lay leaders who were not tethered so strongly to tradition. Second, perhaps the Rebbe was concerned that this group would be more easily manipulated by the Soviet government that wanted to undermine Jewish observance. This would also create competing interests for overseas support for Russian Jewry, creating communal politics over the allocation of financial resources.]] and, in his view, that it could cause more problems than it would solve. The Rebbe wrote to Rabbi Katzenellenbogen that “the idea of a conference needs further consideration,” urging him to not act unilaterally, but to wait to consult with other rabbinic leaders.[[138: Unpublished personal handwritten letter from the Rebbe to Rabbi Katzenellenbogen dated 23 Cheshvan, 5687 (November 21, 1926), Rabbi Dovid Kamenetsky Archives.]] But that didn’t stop Gurewicz. In the months to come, he traveled across Russia attempting to gain support for the conference, falsely claiming that he had the Rebbe’s endorsement. He started with smaller communities and eventually met with the leaders of the largest community in Moscow. Some local leaders were supportive. Others were concerned that the congress, being lay-led, would ignore the concerns of the rabbis and bring about religious changes,[[139: Report by Rabbi Yosef Zevin on the congress; debate about the Congress of Jewish Religious Communities in the USSR in 1925–26, Michael Beizer and Anatoli Karasev, published by Jews in Russia and Eastern Europe, summer 2003, Hebrew University of Jerusalem.]] and even step into other issues of politics and economics. The Moscow leaders also resented the fact that Gurewicz had saved them for last, meeting with smaller Jewish communities first. The fears of religious change that concerned the Moscow community leaders were valid. The intentions of LERO’s leadership were exposed when a conflict erupted over local Jewish communal politics in Leningrad. The board of LERO had twenty-four members whose views split along the lines of those who wanted to retain classic Jewish education and religious practices and those who wished to modernize religion. The reformers, who were the majority, unilaterally instituted changes behind the backs of the religious minority. Their actions were exposed, creating a major schism among the members. Feeling betrayed, the ten religious members resigned in October 1926, accusing LERO of acting unethically and “secretly implementing a plan to reform Jewish education and religious practice against the Torah and tradition.”[[140: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, letter from Rabbi Althaus.]] A few weeks later, the ten members called a meeting at the main synagogue in Leningrad and decided to apply for government recognition of a new religious organization.[[141: They also sent a three-man delegation to Rabbi Katzenellenbogen, still under the sway of Gurewicz, who considered the conflict as just another disagreement between Chasidim and mitnagdim, who had been debating various details of Jewish practice for two centuries already. The delegation told the rabbi that this was false and in truth, it was a disagreement between those who wanted to change Judaism in an attempt to modernize it and those who wanted to retain its traditional character. Katzenellenbogen insisted they rejoin LERO and follow the majority. Despite the fact that they held the rabbi in high esteem, they refused, telling him that the leaders of LERO had misled him. The next Shabbat, the ten men who had resigned from LERO spoke in synagogues throughout Leningrad. A few days later, they held a large community meeting, and it was decided to create a new community. At the time, Soviet law permitted any religious group of twenty to petition for recognition as a community.]] The actions of LERO in Leningrad substantiated the Rebbe’s concerns about the national congress they wished to organize. The matter became clearer when the conference organizers met with local rabbis in Leningrad. Rabbi Eliyahu Althaus described it as a tense meeting, with the rabbis telling the organizers that the conference was unnecessary. “We don’t need a conference to deal with questions about kosher and religious life,” they said. “We already handle that.”[[142: Althaus account, Likkutei Dibburim, vol. 6.]] After a heated debate, the planners revealed the true intent behind the conference. “Our real agenda is targeting schools and education,” they admitted. “We want to introduce reforms in the schools to make them relevant to the spirit of the age. The schooling we currently have is outdated. What our forefathers gave us from a bygone time is unsophisticated, with untrained teachers, and without a proper curriculum. We are living in a new age. Today we need new people, new teachers, and an enlightened, relevant Torah.”[[143: Ibid.]] The Rebbe understood that the plan for a national congress involved an even more sinister danger. More and more evidence pointed to the fact that the plan was supported by the Yevesektzia. The Yevesektzia viewed it as an opportunity to create a new communal structure that would be an alternative to their intractable foe, the Rebbe. At this point, the Rebbe was chair of the Committee of Rabbis, which was the most influential force in Russian Jewish life. Groups like the JDC provided their funding. This new group would claim to represent Russian Jewry, diverting funds from the Rebbe’s secret network of educational and religious services. It would be guided by lay people, not rabbis, many of whom wished to enact changes in education and religious practice. The new organization would render irrelevant the opposition of the rabbis who refused to compromise on their ideals; it would clear the way for the Yevesektzia to advance their agenda. At first the Yevesektzia did not show its hand, operating in the background. If the congress succeeded, it would establish a new communal leadership that the Yevesektzia could easily manipulate. But soon, the Yevesektzia’s role became obvious. In cities throughout Russia, the secret police interrogated local rabbis, asking if they supported the planned conference and warning them not to follow Rabbi Schneersohn’s lead. The rabbis who endorsed the conference were encouraged to go; some were even offered compensation for travel expenses. “Then,” says Althaus, “the rabbis were asked to swear, in writing, not to disclose what had been discussed with them, on the pain of death.” Rabbi Binyamin Gorodetsky,[[144: Rabbi Binyamin Gorodetsky (1907–95) came from a Chabad family in Bobruysk, Russia. He was an activist in the Chabad underground in Russia, escaping in 1946. He established the Chabad bureau in Paris and served as a shliach for the Rayatz and the seventh Rebbe. He was instrumental in establishing Chabad’s educational network in Morocco as well as founding institutions in Europe and Israel. See Rabbi Binyamin Gorodetsky, Light in the Darkness (New York: Shengold Publishers, 1986).]] Chabad’s roaming ambassador and liaison to the JDC in the postwar era, writes in his autobiography that the Russian authorities supported the conference. “Their sole intention was to use it as a counterweight against the Rebbe’s leadership, so that he could not receive funds from American Jewry, from the JDC, and others.” Just after Passover, in April of 1927, the Leningrad community announced that the conference would take place that October, after the High Holidays. But despite the event being scheduled, Gurewicz’s grand plan remained in jeopardy. Following the Rebbe’s lead and seeing through the facade, the major communities in Moscow and Minsk withheld their approval of the conference. Debates for and against put many Jewish communities throughout Russia in turmoil. If the conference failed, the plan to create a new organizational structure that could challenge the Rebbe’s leadership of Russian Jewry would break down. For seven years, the Rebbe and the Yevesektzia had been battling each other from a distance. He would open a Jewish school; they would shut it down. The Rebbe would dispatch a rabbi, shochet, or teacher to a community, and the secret police would arrest the person. He would lobby the government to allow religious life to function, and they would try to undermine those efforts. Now the scheme to replace the Rebbe as the most influential Jewish leader in Russia was being countered. With this plan faltering, it would only be a matter of time before the Yevesektzia took drastic action against the Rebbe directly. In the summer of 1926, a delegation of prominent rabbis, led by Rabbi Zev Kipnis, a distinguished Torah scholar, came to see the Rebbe with the idea of creating a conference of rabbis in the city of Korosten, Ukraine. The Rebbe was wary. “My personal opinion was that the conference was not necessary,” the Rebbe wrote later.[[145: Igrot Kodesh 1:628.]] Still, this conference was unlike the one being developed by the Leningrad community, whose agenda was to restructure Jewish life in Russia. In this case, the Rebbe felt that the intentions of the rabbis were noble, even though he was skeptical about the outcome. “I felt that the conference in Korosten would not be productive, but that it would also not cause any harm because the organizers are G-d-fearing.” The organizers secured government sanction and announced the conference.[[146: For a detailed historical background, see Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 20. See also Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter dated November 10, 1927.]] On October 26, 1926, close to one hundred rabbis convened in Korosten, where half of the population of twelve thousand was Jewish. Despite his doubts, the Rebbe encouraged some of the leading Chabad rabbis to attend, including Rabbi Yosef Zevin, who was a featured speaker. He secretly dispatched Bentzion Shemtov, then just twenty-four, to work behind the scenes to ensure an agenda that would strengthen Jewish education and tradition. His efforts were successful. The Rebbe did not personally attend, but the delegates nominated him as honorary chairman, notifying him by telegram. When the Rebbe cabled back, his message was read while all the rabbis present stood in respect.[[147: In addition, the Rebbe sent the conference two letters. He wrote of the difficulties of Jews throughout Jewish history: “In every generation and in country after country, when there were decrees to destroy us, great Jewish scholars and leaders stood up.” Igrot Kodesh 1:543–48.]] “You are following the approach of the [fifth] Lubavitcher Rebbe and Rabbi Chaim Soloveitchik of Brisk, our teachers, who did not compromise,” he wrote. He was referring to the principled stand of both rabbis regarding standards of Jewish tradition during conferences held decades earlier under the czar.[[148: The Rebbe writes that he was surprised by the honor. “Suddenly, without any advance knowledge, I received an express telegram that the conference of rabbis had unanimously chosen me as honorary president.” Igrot Kodesh 1:549.]] While at the conference, Bentzion Shemtov discovered the reason that the government had sanctioned the conference: It was a strategy of divide and conquer to prepare the ground for the conference being organized by the Leningrad community. “They wanted to evaluate the strength of the more traditional elements and drive a wedge between them and the modern Jewish leaders,” he wrote in his memoir.[[149: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, 91.]] “This was the same strategy they used successfully between Christian religious groups.” With the hand of the rabbis weakened, they could pursue their goal of creating a new leadership structure for the Jewish community. But to the Communist officials monitoring the conference, the esteem that the rabbis showed for the Rebbe was alarming. Their primary opponent was the Rebbe, and he clearly had broad support from Russian Jewish leaders. Their scheme to use the conference to divide Russian Jewry and weaken the Rebbe’s leadership had failed. Shemtov was arrested following the conference. Government agents conducted long interrogations, and, in the process, they confirmed their intent to use the conference to weaken the rabbis’ influence.[[150: Shemtov writes that he learned this during the long days of questioning by the interrogators.]] Rabbi Kipnis, the conference organizer, was also arrested, and the executive board formed at the conference was dissolved by the authorities.[[151: Memoir of Rabbi Kipnis, reprinted, chap. 20; Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit.]] Kipnis writes in his memoir: “They imprisoned me for sixteen days and told me that the Rebbe is the most dangerous person to the Communist regime, unlike other rabbis who were very passive.” As part of the interrogation, the secret police threatened Kipnis, saying it had been decided on the highest level that four people would be sent to Siberia: the Rebbe, Rabbi Shimon Lazaroff,[[152: A prominent rabbi and leader of the Chabad community in Leningrad. He studied in the yeshivah in Lubavitch, was arrested in 1930, and died in a prison camp three years later. Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, index, “Lazaroff.”]] Kipnis, and one other. He wrote that they planned a private trial so as not to elicit criticism from abroad. All four were indeed arrested. Kipnis writes, “It was a miracle I was freed.” The Chasidim in the vicinity of the Rebbe felt a sense of foreboding during the High Holidays in September 1926. Traditionally, before the sounding of the shofar, a series of verses are recited out loud by the cantor with great emotion. This time, before the words “Al Ya’shkuni Ziedim – Let the wicked not oppress me,” the Rebbe cried out in a loud voice, “Oy gevalt!” This expression of angst by the Rebbe alarmed the Chasidim. Rabbi Eliyahu Althaus, who was standing nearby, writes that he was extremely disturbed.[[153: Likkutei Dibburim, chap. 66.]] “The Rebbe was always vigilant with his words, even in ordinary conversation,” Althaus notes, “and much more so on the first day of Rosh HaShanah.” To Althaus it was clear: “This was an omen.” That portentous feeling was present through the holiday of Simchat Torah,[[154: This festive holiday celebrates the completion and restarting of the annual cycle of Torah reading. It comes two weeks after Yom Kippur and is celebrated with dancing many times through the night and the day. It concludes the annual season of the Jewish High Holidays in an upbeat, joyous way.]] normally the most joyous of occasions. “The talks of the Rebbe that night and the next day were infused with a sense of bitterness.” The Rebbe asked that all congregations around the world start reciting a daily allotment of psalms that are usually recited during times of distress. Chasidim wondered if this request from the Rebbe came from a premonition that dangerous times lay ahead. “I am permitting myself to reveal to you certain things said to me in private,” the Rebbe’s secretary, Rabbi Yechezkel (Chatche) Feigin, wrote in a letter to his friend Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson in the United States about that fateful Simchat Torah.[[155: Letter from Rabbi Feigin to Jacobson dated 17 Iyar, 5687 (May 19, 1927).]] “After the talks at the table, the Rebbe retreated to his study.” Sensing a moment of opportunity, “I took my sons into the Rebbe’s room to receive a blessing. Afterward I remained alone with the Rebbe.” Rabbi Feigin then changed the subject from personal matters to the hardships of recent months, requesting a blessing “to remove the obstacles to Torah study.” The Rebbe was silent. “He seemed to be in a higher world.” Finally, he responded, “Chatche, there is no blessing for this! Avraham Avinu conducted himself with self-sacrifice because it had to be done. For Avraham, the self-sacrifice was part of what he had to do, because it was necessary to reveal divinity in the world. He needed to do it, so he did it.” The Rebbe then contrasted this with the self-sacrifice of Rabbi Akiva, who taught Torah despite the ban by Roman authorities in the second century. The Talmud explains that while the Romans were torturing Rabbi Akiva to death, he remarked that he had always yearned to be a martyr for G-d.[[156: Rabbi Akiva, one of the greatest talmudic scholars, was killed by the Romans in 135 CE in a time of anti-Semitic oppression. The Talmud says that when faced with martyrdom, he told his students: “All my days, I was troubled by this verse, ‘with all your soul’ (Deut. 6:5), meaning, ‘even if He takes your soul.’ I said to myself: When will the opportunity come that I may fulfill this verse? And now it has come to my hands” (Brachot 61b).]] “In our case,” he continued, “we must strive to teach Torah, and if self-sacrifice is required, we will do it too.” Unlike Rabbi Akiva, the Rebbe was not seeking martyrdom, but if it was necessary to fulfill his mission of teaching Torah, he was ready. It seemed that the moment when the Rebbe might be required to pay the ultimate sacrifice was drawing closer. All that winter, Althaus writes, “heavy clouds hung over the Rebbe and the entire Chabad community. The atmosphere in his home was charged with dread.” They discovered later that the Yevesektzia was “energetically fabricating slanderous accusations against the Rebbe.” In February 1927, they made their first public move.[[157: Rabbi Morozov was arrested on February 23, 1927, initially accused of attempting to smuggle the Rebbe’s books abroad. He was jailed with common criminals and suffered greatly. His daughters Rachel and Sara had been arrested a few weeks earlier, on February 9, for Zionist activities and were accused of belonging to the Zionist organization Dror. In prison, they became aware of their father’s plight and declared a hunger strike; on the fifth day of their strike he was moved to a cell with Zionist prisoners. That May, he was indicted for helping Jews cross the border illegally, sentenced to three years in exile, and deported to Krasnoyarsk. Irina Osipova, Hasidim: Saving Thy People, trans. Malcolm Gilbert, chap. 1.]] The Rebbe’s secretary Rabbi Elchonon Morozov was arrested and jailed, held with people who Althaus describes as “the worst political prisoners.” Before he was taken away, Rabbi Morozov managed to secretly hand the list of underground yeshivas and schools to his eleven-year-old son, who hid it without the police noticing. Rabbi Feigin wrote that because Rabbi Morozov was a key figure in the underground, his arrest was “terrifying and ominous.”[[158: Letter from Rabbi Feigin to Jacobson dated 15 Iyar, 5687 (May 17, 1927).]] Rabbi Morozov had carried much of the financial responsibility for the yeshivas. His arrest created an additional financial strain on the their operations. The shadow of the Yevesektzia loomed like an angry beast waiting to pounce at the slightest provocation. Still, the Rebbe courageously disregarded their intimidations and the very real threats. On Purim, in mid-March 1927, the Rebbe held a fiery public farbrengen. Rabbi Zalman Duchman, who was present, described it as “terrifying.”[[159: Rabbi Zalman Duchman, As I Heard Them: Stories, Sayings and Memories from Lubavitch of Yesteryear (Brooklyn, NY: Wellspring Press).]] The Rebbe screamed, “Who is the Yevesektzia? A rabbi’s son? A butcher’s son? A villager’s son? I am not frightened by them!” He brazenly urged his Chasidim to continue practicing and spreading Judaism and to defy the government opposition to the point of self-sacrifice. The Rebbe repeated over and over, “We must sacrifice our lives not to send our children to their schools.”[[160: Ibid.]] “In every conceivable way,” describes Althaus,[[161: Althaus account, Likkutei Dibburim, vol. 6.]] “this Purim was unlike any other. The Rebbe spoke with such passion, at a level we had never heard before. It felt like he was literally pouring out his soul.” At one point, the Rebbe turned to one of his Chasidim and forcefully enjoined him, “Zalman, if they ever build a bonfire and confront you with the choice of yielding your child to their schools or casting yourself into the flames, let yourself be cast into the flames!” Everyone was acutely aware of the Yevesektzia spies present at the farbrengen, listening to every word spoken. Duchman writes, “Everyone was in dread.” Althaus recalls, “We gazed at the agents, their faces flushed with anger. We knew that it was only a matter of time before something terrible would happen.” Rabbi Eliezer Poupko[[162: Jem Oral History Project.]] was the rabbi in the Russian town of Velizh. A local Communist activist confided to him that the Rebbe would be arrested shortly. He decided to travel to St. Petersburg to warn the Rebbe. The Rebbe was unfazed by Rabbi Popko’s report, addressing him in deferential third-party Yiddish, “Velizh Rav, I am ready to go on mesirat nefesh [to give up my life].” As Rabbi Popko told his grandson Mordechai Dovber, “The Rebbe would not budge.”

