[[1: The account in this chapter is based to a large degree on the memoirs of the Rebbe, the Rebbe’s diary, and letters from Rabbi Eliyahu Chaim Althaus written at the time. The material can be found in Rabbi Dr. Alter B. Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle: The Arrest and Liberation of Rabbi Yosef Y. Schneersohn of Lubavitch in Soviet Russia (Kehot Publication Society, 1999). Also see “Arrest & Liberation,” available at: chabad.org/3382365. Another important source is Di Yisurim Fun Lubavitcher Rebben in Soviet Russland (The Lubavitcher Rebbe’s Ordeal in Soviet Russia), first published in Yiddish by an anonymous writer in 1930 in Riga. The late Rabbi Yehoshua Mondshine identifies the author as the Riga journalist Elimelech Josselsohn, a religious Zionist who studied in Jerusalem before returning to Riga, where he wrote for the Frimorgen newspaper. This narrative provides important historical context, and as translator Uri Kaploun writes, “It photographs the mood and climate of that turbulent era.” It was translated into English for the first time in Likkutei Dibburim, vol. 6 (Brooklyn, New York: Kehot Publication Society, 2012). For a more detailed historical background in Hebrew, see Menachem Zilgebaum, Sippur Shel Chag (Kfar Chabad, 2011). The book is supplemented by original material (provided by Rabbi Yifrach Abramov) from file no. 898 of the OGPU (United Government Political Administration), managed by chief investigating officer Varenberg in Leningrad. The original questionnaire filled out on behalf of the Rebbe was partially printed (in English translation) in Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, appendix 8, 315–16, under the caption “Excerpt from Interrogation of Witnesses/ Investigator’s name: Lulov.”]]
It was a few minutes after midnight on June 15, 1927,[[2: June 14 and the beginning of June 15 (14 Sivan, 5687).]] and the Rebbe and his family had gathered for a late supper in his Leningrad apartment. For the Rebbe, it had been a long day. He received people for private audiences until 11:30 p.m. and then prayed the evening service. Now he was finally sitting down for dinner with his family. He was weary.
Barely ten minutes passed, and suddenly the silence was broken by the doorbell ringing. Chana, the Rebbe’s oldest daughter, went to the double doors, asking who was creating a commotion at this late hour. A loud voice exclaimed, “The upravdom (superintendent).” The Rebbe, realizing it was a ruse, stopped anyone from opening the door. “It’s not the upravdom,” he warned. “It’s the GPU (secret police).”[[3: Naftali Hertz Klotzkin, the Rebbe’s assistant, was present. He later recalled the details to Zalman Duchman; see Duchman, LeSheima Ozen, 1963 edition, 155–56 (1990 edition, p. 191).]] A few moments later, two officials, followed by a contingent of armed men, burst into the dining room shouting, “We are representatives of the GPU. Who is Schneersohn and where is he?”
Tensions with the Yevesektzia had been rising for years. Their latest skirmish was over the Rebbe obstructing the conference of Russian Jewry.[[4: The Jewish Telegraphic Agency (JTA), the US-based Jewish news service, described the arrest as being caused by the controversy over the planned conference. Their report made no mention of the Yevesektzia’s efforts to support the conference by pressuring rabbis to attend. On September 22, 1927, the JTA reported from Riga (full report available at: https://www.jta.org/1927/09/22/archive/riga-hears-sensational-report-on-cause-of-lubowitscher-rebbes-arrest):“Well-informed circles in Moscow, according to the reports received here, trace the arrest of Rabbi Schneursohn to a serious party conflict within Russian Jewry and place the responsibility for the course of the events upon certain Jewish leaders. The controversy centered around the proposed conference of Jewish kehillahs in the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics, which is to be held in Leningrad on October 21, with the permission of the Soviet government. “Rabbi Schneursohn and the group of rabbis associated with him voiced their opposition to the holding of this conference at the present time. They contended that in view of prevailing conditions it would be impossible to elect a truly representative body of Russian Jewry and that is why the committee which might result from this conference would not be endowed with the power to carry on the work and have the religious authority required. This attitude of the Lubowitscher Rebbe called forth resentment among the initiators of the Leningrad conference. To remove his opposition they decided, it is stated, to discredit him in the eyes of the Soviet authorities, an action which resulted in his arrest.”]] On Purim, the Rebbe had publicly encouraged his Chasidim to resist the Yevesektzia. Since then, the Chasidim had noticed greater surveillance over the Rebbe’s home. Still, the Yevesektzia hesitated. Global politics would set the stage for them to act.
Two months earlier, at the end of May, England severed diplomatic relations with Russia after discovering Russian spies in the United Kingdom.[[5: Diplomatic relations between the UK and Russia were severed at the end of May 1927 after a police raid on the All-Russian Co-operative Society in the UK. Conservative British prime minister Stanley Baldwin presented the House of Commons with deciphered Soviet telegrams that proved Soviet espionage activities, available at: https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1927/may/24/prime-ministers-statement.]] The following week, international tensions rose again with the assassination of Russia’s ambassador to Poland, Pyotr Voykov.[[6: Pyotr Voykov (1888–1927) was Jewish. He was born in Ukraine and attended high school in Yalta. Later he studied in Geneva, where he met Stalin and eventually became active in the Bolshevik party. The new Soviet Union attempted to appoint him ambassador to Canada, but the Canadians refused to certify him, because of the allegations of his participation in the assassination of the czar. Later he was sent as an ambassador to Poland, where he was assassinated.]] A Russian monarchist slayed Voykov at the Warsaw train station because of his involvement in killing Czar Nicholas. In response, Stalin unleashed a wave of oppression against his rivals, ordering the execution of former members of the nobility in Russia.[[7: Stalin claimed the monarchists were part of a foreign network with ties to England. Stephen Kotkin, Stalin: Paradoxes of Power (Penguin Publishers, 2014), 635.]] Historian Stephen Kotkin wrote that “Party organizations mobilized meetings at hundreds of factories to affirm the executions.” Stalin empowered the GPU with “extrajudicial powers including the introduction of emergency tribunals to expedite cases.” Among the targets of the crackdowns were members of the clergy. As the Rebbe wrote, “They struck out against religious leaders from all faiths, to take revenge for the assassination of their ambassador in Poland and for the expulsion from England.”[[8: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter dated May 19, 1928 (19 Iyar, 5688).]] The Yevesektzia seized the moment to go after their most fiery foe, the Rebbe.
Both arresting officers came from Chabad families who were familiar to the Rebbe.[[9: Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, chap. 1.]] One was Mikhail Nachmanson,[[10: Many Jews were drawn to Communism by the promise of the eradication of the systematic corruption and anti-Semitism that was rampant under the czarist regime. During the czar’s rule, Jews were regulated to living in the Pale of Settlement, and pogroms were frequent and supported by the government. There were barriers to higher education and economic opportunity. Some Jews supported Communism in the hope of gaining equality.]] born in 1903 in the chasidic enclave of Nevel.[[11: Located about 120 miles from Lubavitch, Nevel had a vibrant Chabad community. In 1897, its Jewish population reached 5,897. At the time of the Rebbe’s arrest, there was a yeshivah in Nevel, but it was shut down by the authorities a year later. (See the JTA’s report: https://www.jta.org/1928/11/02/archive/russian-yeshiva-in-nevel-subsidized-by-americans-closed.) The local Jewish population was annihilated by the Nazis during the Holocaust.]] His father was a Chabad Chasid[[12: How did two young men, Lulov and Nachmanson, both from Chabad families, turn against their parents? Historian Nissan Ruppo, today the rabbi in Kostroma, grew up as a Communist Youth leader in Russia. He says this was part of the culture – put the ideals of the party over those of the family.]] who had visited Lubavitch. At the age of sixteen, Mikhail joined the Bolshevik party. He studied at Moscow’s Sverdlov Communist University, where Lenin and Stalin lectured, and then law at Leningrad University. He rose in the Communist ranks, heading the regional departments of the secret police, the GPU, and its successor, the NKVD. In 1936, he was arrested for counterrevolutionary activity and sentenced to labor camp in the remote Kolyma region of Siberia.[[13: Nachmanson was arrested on his birthday, September 9, 1936, and transferred to Lubyanka Prison in Leningrad. He was never tried but was subjected to an extrajudicial sentence of five years. He was released in 1941, arrested a second time in 1950, and freed in 1953, after Stalin’s death. He eventually received amnesty in 1956 (available at: https://base.memo.ru/person/show/1550682). After being freed, he lived in Novgorod, Russia. Toward the end of his life, he benefited from the Hesed, the Jewish soup kitchen operated on behalf of the US JDC for indigent Jews in the post-Soviet period. For a detailed timeline on Nachmanson’s life, see Mikhail Gorelik, “Rabbi and Chekist,” available at: https://lechaim.ru/ARHIV/238/gorelik.htm.]] Later in his life, he lived in Novgorod. Nachmanson told an interviewer in 1992, “Never, even in the most terrible days, did I separate myself from the party, still believing in it.”[[14: The interview conducted in Russian in Novgorod in 1992 details Nachmanson’s long tragic life, including repeated arrests and long prison sentences. Still, he remained a staunch Communist as the Soviet Union was disintegrating. There is no reference to the Rebbe’s arrest in this interview. Rabbi Nissan Ruppo of Kostroma says, “Few Communists like Nachmanson would tell of nefarious activities done decades earlier.” Interview available at: https://vgulage.name/books/nahmanson-m-s-pereryv-v-partstazhe-lit-zapis-smirnov-v/.]] The second officer was Grigory Lulov,[[15: Grigory Nikolaevich Lulov (1899–1940) joined the Communist party in 1916 and the Cheka secret police three years later. He became a member of its successor, the GPU, in Leningrad. He was awarded the Order of Lenin (1937) with a badge reading “Honorary Worker of the Cheka-GPU.” Lulov was arrested at the end of 1938 and executed by verdict of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR on January 21, 1940. V. Abramov, Jews in the KGB: Executioners and Victims; M. Yauza, Eksmo (2005) [Russian].]] born in Riga in 1899. He joined the secret police in 1919. At the end of 1938, he was arrested and shot by order of the Supreme Soviet.
Eliyahu Chaim Althaus describes the Rebbe’s reaction to the intrusion.[[16: Likkutei Dibburim (English), 6:170; Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, 301.]] “The Rebbe was still at the supper table when the officers arrived. Unruffled, and with a quiet smile, he remained seated. He quietly requested a cup of coffee and then some water for the ritual hand washing after the meal, and recited grace.” He said grace slowly “so family members could cover incriminating documents with unimportant papers. Because of this, they did not discover information during the search that could be damaging.”[[17: Rabbi Avraham Weingarten, Nitzutzei Or (Brooklyn, NY: 2007), 241–44.]] Afterward, he rose from the table and retired to his study, where he calmly took his seat. Facing the armed men, the Rebbe remained composed, unimpressed by the show of force. “I don’t know which Schneersohn you seek. If you enter someone’s home, surely you know in advance who dwells there. This drama is pointless. Deliver your message and clearly state your wishes.”[[18: Letter from Rabbi Eliyahu Chaim Althaus dated 24 Iyar, 5688 (May 13, 1928); Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, appendix 7.]]
Nachmanson ordered his assistant Lulov to join him in searching the premises. As for the Rebbe, he told him, “If you are able to continue eating, we won’t disturb you,” and he stationed one official in the dining room as the soldiers began conducting a thorough search of the house.
As this was unfolding, the Rebbe’s future son-in-law, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, and his daughter Chaya Mushka (known as Chaya Moussia) arrived at the Rebbe’s apartment building. Seeing that the entire house was brightly lit, they understood that something was amiss. Chaya Mushka suggested that Rabbi Menachem Mendel wait outside, and if the GPU was present, she would open a particular window as a signal to him. Through the open window, one of the daughters called out, “Schneerson, guests have come to visit us!”[[19: There are varied reports about this incident. According to Rabbi Rafael Kahn, Shemuot VeSippurim, 3:220, Chaya Mushka opened the window. Althaus writes only that it was “one of the daughters.” Yeshivah student Avraham Weingarten said that he heard from the Ramash that it was the oldest daughter, Chana, who “reported what was happening.” Weingarten, Nitzutzei Or, footnote 147; Boruch Oberlander and Elkanah Shmotkin, Early Years: The Formative Years of the Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson (Kehot Publication Society), 477.]]
Immediately he rushed to alert the Chasidim who were closest to the Rebbe, waking up Althaus and running to the home of Rabbi Chaim Lieberman, the Rebbe’s secretary. Knocking on the window, they warned Lieberman to destroy any financial records and documents in his possession related to the secret school system. They feared the GPU would search his house next.[[20: Likkutei Dibburim (English), 6:170–71; Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, 301–2.]]
In the Rebbe’s apartment, Nachmanson continued his search, entering the room of the Rebbe’s two younger daughters, Chaya Mushka and her younger sister Sheina. “Which party do you belong to?” he asked. They replied unabashedly, “We are members of our father’s party, apolitical Jewish women who hold dear Jewish traditions and despise new trends.” Sheina insisted that she was under no obligation to explain why this was the case. Nachmanson attempted to intimidate them. “You must consider the authority and power of the GPU that can force even the silent tongue to speak and tell what is hidden in the heart.” Sheina retorted, “The entire tragedy is that you wish to accomplish everything by power and coercion, attempting to intimidate the intelligent and informed with the power of the fist and the threats of the gun.”[[21: Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, 29–30.]]
The search lasted an hour and a half. Having been informed earlier that he was at risk, the Rebbe had removed sensitive documents from his apartment,[[22: Yisrael Aryeh Leib Schneerson (1906–52), the brother of the Ramash, was attending university in Leningrad at the time. He had befriended some Jewish Communists and was able to glean information that they were planning to act against the Rebbe. He shared that information with the Rebbe, who realized that it was imperative to remove any documents from his home that could be used to incriminate him. Interview with Asa Paz, a relative of Aryeh Leib’s wife, JEM Oral History Project.]] giving them to Zalman Duchman.[[23: According to Duchman’s grandson Rabbi Shalom Ber Lipskar, who says that his grandfather never examined the documents.]] Despite the long search, nothing incriminating was found. According to Duchman, the search in the Rebbe’s home lasted longer than planned,[[24: Duchman, LeSheima Ozen, 205.]] buying Lieberman extra time. Lieberman recalled, “Immediately I took all the mail that had been received, as well as whatever else might arouse their suspicions, and burned it all. The fire had not yet consumed everything when there was a knock on the door, and in walked the agents. As they entered, they looked at the fire and muttered to themselves, ‘Everything is already burned.’” Still they arrested Lieberman.[[25: The building’s doorman told the GPU officers that someone had come to the property late that night. During Lieberman’s interrogation after his arrest, they wanted to know who that was. “I told them they were two drunkards who forgot their address and thought my house was theirs.” Afterward they abandoned that line of questioning. Kfar Chabad, issue no. 108 (25 Av, 5743), 13; Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, 339, footnote 24.]]
After the officers completed the search in the Rebbe’s home, they requested that he sign a form indicating that the search had been conducted legally. The Rebbe refused, warning the officers, “I believe that the arrest will result in highly negative publicity, and you should proceed with caution until the truth is clarified – if you are actually seeking the truth. However, if you mean to conceal this error or libel with lies and falsehood, I am certain that you will regret it.”[[26: Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, 31.]] The Rebbe told them to call their superiors and share his warning, asking to be left under house arrest. They made the call, but the superior refused.[[27: Likkutei Dibburim (English), 6:172; Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, 304.]]
The Rebbe’s daughters pleaded with the officers not to arrest their father. Nachmanson threatened them, “If you speak one more word, you will be arrested too!” Chana, the oldest, stood up to him. “We speak in the language used by people who retain their humility, not in the tongue of those who have just emerged from the slime, unable to speak forthrightly and capable only of waving a revolver and threatening imprisonment.” She begged Nachmanson to take her and her sisters instead of her father. She tried reasoning with him, pointing out that the Rebbe was physically weak. She asked that a doctor be consulted to see if he was well enough to go through such an ordeal. Finally, she exclaimed, “Surely you must have what the world calls ethics and decency!” and burst into tears. The Rebbe told her, “Only wishful thinking could imagine that pleas and tears could help.”
The Rebbe demanded that be permitted to take his tefillin and books, and he told the officers that according to the law, he should be able to receive food directly from his family. Nachmanson agreed to the request, promising that no one would disturb him while he was praying, reading, and writing. “This very day you will return home,” he added. “You will be asked a few questions by the director of the prison and then permitted to return home.”
In all the commotion, the Rebbe’s mother, Rebbetzin Shterna Sara, was awakened. She burst into tears and cried out, “Woe unto us, my dear departed husband! They are taking our son Yosef Yitzchak, your one and only son who sacrifices himself for others, who heeds your instruction with actual self-sacrifice. Bandits have come, slayers of innocent people. And for what purpose? Holy ancestors, they desire to extinguish your soul’s flame!” She implored the officers to take her instead. Nachmanson, discomforted by her outburst, requested that the Rebbe take her to her room to calm her down. The Rebbe walked her back to her room, and they were soon joined by his wife, daughters, and the Rashag.
As they were leaving the apartment, the Rashag asked the Rebbe, “What should be done? Should we publicize the arrest, or perhaps it would be better to keep this quiet, not to provoke them with publicity?” The Rebbe said that at this point, he should use quiet diplomacy to try to gain his release. He requested that the Chasidim pray for his welfare at the graves of his ancestors.[[28: Since biblical times, when Calev visited the Ma’arat HaMakhpela, the Tomb of the Patriarchs in Hebron, to pray for success in his mission of scouting the Land of Israel, it has been a Jewish custom to pray at the graves of the righteous. The Rebbes of Lubavitch traditionally brought notes with prayers and requests to the graves of their predecessors. The seventh Rebbe visited the grave of the Rayatz regularly, spending hours reading prayer requests from thousands of Chasidim.]] “The priority above all else was to maintain the entire network of educational activities.” Though the Rebbe was already under much financial strain, he told the Rashag, “If needed, borrow money to keep the programs running.”
Later, the Rebbe recalled the moment in his diary: “My mother, wife, daughters, and son-in-law stood shocked, their faces white as plaster and their eyes filled with tears. At that moment, no words were to be found. They gazed at me with wonderment, hope and longing, mercy and supplication, not uttering a word.”
While they were waiting for the vehicle that would take the Rebbe away, some of the Rebbe’s personal belongings, including his tallit and tefillin, sefarim, and additional items, were packed in a travel bag that had belonged to the Rashab. Before they left the house, Lulov, who came from a Chabad family, offered to carry the Rebbe’s bag. “My grandfather once carried your grandfather’s bag,” he said. “Chasidim remain Chasidim and I, too, will carry your belongings.” The Rebbe clutched his bag and said, “Your grandfather was a Chasid of my grandfather, so he was privileged to carry those bags to the place of my grandfather’s choosing. You, however, desire to carry it so that I should go to a destination of your choosing. This is not happening. I will not follow your way.” With these words, the Rebbe took his bag and gave it to one of the guards to carry.
The Rebbe walked down the steps outside his house with the armed contingent surrounding him on all sides. Family members tried to escort the Rebbe and were rebuffed by a soldier. Finally, Nachmanson ordered the soldier to the side and the family escorted the Rebbe to the street. The Rebbe noticed a clock in a store window. It was 2:20 a.m.
The vehicle was surrounded by guards; one assisted the Rebbe with entering the vehicle. Nachmanson sat in the front of the car, and Lulov sat in the back opposite the Rebbe, brandishing a revolver. They began traveling to Shpalerka prison,[[29: The prison was originally built during the reign of Alexander II of Russia, in the years 1871–75, on 25 Shpalernaya Street. During the Communist regime, it was notorious for its harsh conditions and the use of torture. Famous dissidents such as Alexander Solzhenitsyn were held there. Today it continues to function as a prison.]] less than a mile away. “Chasidim were stationed on street corners acting like they were intoxicated so they could see where they would take the Rebbe,” the Ramash said later.[[30: Weingarten, Nitzutzei Or.]] On one corner the Rebbe noticed Eliyahu Althaus, quaking in fear, and nodded in his direction.
After a short drive, they arrived at the notorious six-story prison. The doors were locked, and Lulov and Nachmanson started banging on them. The guard peered through the eyehole but refused to open the door; the plan had been to bring the Rebbe before midnight, and now it was hours later. The Ramash explained, “The guard was changed at midnight, and the new one did not want to let them in.” When they finally opened the door, Nachmanson told one of the guards, “Take this citizen to the investigating room.” Nachmanson left hastily to join his friend Lulov. Afterward they went to arrest Lieberman. Says the Ramash, “This was the first miracle. In the meanwhile, there was time to destroy the incriminating documents.”[[31: Ibid, 242.]]
“If one is sentenced to be taken to Shpalerka,” the Rebbe writes, “it is for one of two reasons. Either judgment has already been rendered, or it is for questioning – and particularly for [coerced] investigation.” And so began the nineteen-day ordeal, which the Rebbe labeled “Tractate Gehinnom (purgatory).”
Intimidation tactics began immediately. While the Rebbe was still at the entrance of the prison, he asked for permission to pray with his tefillin. Nachmanson barked, “Forget that you are Schneersohn! You are now an ordinary person who is being punished!” Then, alluding to the Rebbe’s refusal to bow to the Yevesektzia, he said, “Now you pay for everything.” In Shpalerka, Nachmanson took on the personality of the prison. “This was a GPU official whose primary task was to frighten prisoners, confuse them, and render them submissive,” the Rebbe wrote later. “I resolved to remain strong and not yield to fear, to speak clearly and to be unaffected by the intrigue in which they sought to immerse me.”
Once inside the prison, instead of escorting the Rebbe, as Nachmanson had requested, the guard simply gestured with his finger that the Rebbe should walk down the length of the corridor till he reached a door that was ajar, telling him, “Once you reach it, turn to one of the recording secretaries, and she will give you a questionnaire that you will respond to in writing.”
The Rebbe walked down a long narrow maze of dark, intimidating corridors lined with burly armed soldiers standing statue-like. It would be a wrong turn that saved the Rebbe from death now, for as he walked slowly, deep in thought, before approaching the open door that he had been told to find, he entered a second corridor with no guards. “I had been instructed to go forward to a door wide-open for all prisoners, and somehow I arrived here.” The Rebbe understood that this was divine providence and decided not to hurry back. He sat down on a bench to rest.
In his diary, the Rebbe gives a window into his thoughts as he sat there, a new prisoner in a place designed to strike terror in the hearts of all who encountered it. He began thinking about what was going on in his home, picturing the anguish, concern, and confusion of his family, and the unknown fate of his sacred chasidic manuscripts and writings. “This vivid panorama made me emotional, and my eyes flowed with hot tears,” wrote the Rebbe. But even in the most terrifying circumstances, with his life and the fate of his movement hanging in the balance, the Rebbe was able to compose himself, writing later:
I felt the need to still this surge of thought. Like a flash of lightning there gleamed within my mind: And what of G-d? Who has done this? Who generated this entire sequence of events? Everything has its source in G-d. True, I am indeed a son, a husband, a father, a father-in-law, one who loves and is beloved. They are all dependent on me, but I – and they in turn – are dependent on G-d, who spoke and created the world. I have done all that I am capable of doing, and G-d will do according to His will, may He be blessed. At that moment, I emerged from the mire and constraints of my situation and ascended to transcendent spiritual heights, with thoughts beyond the confines of our finite, physical existence. I was bolstered by a pure faith and absolute trust in the living G-d, secure in the merit of my holy ancestors.
The Rebbe wrote that these thoughts “sustained my soul and strengthened me greatly. I was unconcerned with the present situation and sat in absolute peace.”
The Rebbe continued reflecting on his situation: “I am a prisoner in Shpalerka – I do not know for what cause. In the interrogation room they will subject me to a barrage of questions, some normal inquiries for information and others startling and totally unanticipated. From my answers they will attempt to weave a net of false accusations or provide a match to ignite a blaze of revenge. I resolved to be strong and not yield to fear, to speak clearly and in no way to be affected by the intrigue in which they sought to enmesh me.”[[32: ibid Mezger.]]
While he was sitting there, the Rebbe was approached by an official who asked him what he was doing. The Rebbe replied, “I was brought here to answer some questions.” The official, who was called Chimka, noted that it was a busy night at the prison, telling the Rebbe, “It’s half past three, and they have already brought many people here tonight. I have been working four hours overtime.”
He asked the Rebbe where he was from. “I come from a small city,” he replied. “I don’t know if you ever heard of it, but I was born in Lubavitch.” Chimka knew it well, as he was from a town in the same region. “In Lubavitch there was the family of a saintly man,” Chimka recalled. “They lived in a large courtyard close to the marketplace, and there was a well in their courtyard. I would go there to drink water, and we would bring our horses to drink too.”
When the Rebbe told him which corridor he had come through, Chimka was incredulous. “From Chimka’s astonishment I understood that the dark corridor through which Nachmanson had directed me to proceed to the administrative center was for serious offenders. Anyone led that way was obviously quite a criminal.” Instead of going down the corridor that the guard had instructed the Rebbe to enter, Chimka led the Rebbe to the administrative office. There, he was given a number, “another step in the dehumanization process,” he wrote. The Rebbe was now inmate number 26818.
He was asked to fill out a questionnaire. The Rebbe told the secretary, “I have nothing to write. I was taken here. My name is Schneersohn. I live at 22 Mochovaya Street. I will not write any answers.” The confused secretary consulted with a supervisor, who attempted to convince the Rebbe to complete the questionnaire.
Finally, the Rebbe dictated to the secretary, “I am Rabbi Schneersohn, son of the celebrated Rebbe of Lubavitch, and I am preoccupied with religious study. Like all religiously observant Jews, I have no connection to politics.” He told her where he was born, where he lived, his title, and where he studied. The secretary took down his statement word for word on the form, and the Rebbe signed it.
At 4:30 a.m., the secretary led the Rebbe through the corridors. “Twelve people were brought here tonight,” she told him. “The majority are religious ministers: Russians, Lutherans, Germans, Poles, a Muslim, and one Jew. They were shot by a firing squad, without investigating them. We were just notified that we should record in writing that they were killed.”[[33: Apparently, some nine thousand people were arrested across Russia at that time. For a detailed historical timeline of the night of the arrest, see Haaros UBiurim, kovetz 1101, page 147, available at: http://haoros.com/archive/.]] It was now apparent to the Rebbe that by not following Nachmanson’s directions, he had miraculously evaded a summary execution.
She added, “You will definitely spend another few days in this fortress, and then they will investigate you.” The secretary told one of the officers, “I brought yarlik 26818” and delivered the papers with the Rebbe’s information. The officer pointed at a room and directed the Rebbe to wait there. The Rebbe demanded his personal belongings, including his tefillin. The official responded with rage, “We have no servants to concern themselves with the personal belongings of prisoners. What need do you have for your belongings? In your prison cell belongings are unnecessary. What exactly do you have there?”
“I have a bag that contains some of my necessities: tefillin, a tallit, a siddur, Psalms, and a thick green silk blanket. If you instruct one of the attendants to bring my bag, I will pay him for his efforts,” replied the Rebbe. “Bourgeois customs!” exclaimed the enraged official. “Give them servants! The prisoners are too sick to carry their bags! It is forbidden to bring any kind of religious garments within the walls of the prison. In any event, the division head, in whose custody you will be placed, will confiscate all clerical garments and religious books. What difference will it make to you if they remain where they are now or in the storage chambers of the head prison official? Forget this nonsense. You must understand that you are a prisoner.”
“During the two hours that I have been here,” the Rebbe answered emphatically, “I have heard it repeated dozens of times that I am a prisoner. I do not know if I alone am a prisoner or if all the officials here are also prisoners. We are identical to each other. You are not allowed to move from your guard post. Just as I must obey prison discipline, similarly you must fulfill your obligations. Stop your abusive diatribes regarding religious matters that are holy to me. The law authorizes me to request my belongings, and it says that you must permit me to pray.”
The Rebbe writes, “My emotional outburst had a strong enough effect to awaken the second official sitting there, and he stared at us with intense astonishment. With smoldering anger, he stroked his moustache and delved into the piles of paper resting on his desk.” The Rebbe finally received his tefillin and marched to his cell. At every turn, officials and guards hurled graphic verbal abuse, describing the horrific acts they had done to others, with the goal of terrifying him. But the Rebbe maintained his composure. Walking down one hall, the Rebbe asked the accompanying officer for permission to pray, but to no avail. Realizing that he may not have another chance, the Rebbe began to lay tefillin as he walked behind the guard.
He had just barely finished donning the tefillin when the guard turned and saw what he had done. Enraged, he struck the Rebbe, pushing him down a ladder. “I realized that the metal buckle of my belt had broken and that it had apparently cut a gash into my stomach,” the Rebbe wrote. “My heart contracted with pain; I felt that in another instant I would faint.” The tefillin were confiscated, but the Rebbe still had his tallit. By 6:00 a.m., the guard brought the Rebbe to his cell and pushed him inside. It contained three beds, all occupied. The Rebbe was told to sit on the floor until they decided to bring him a bed.
Later in the morning, when the prisoners were offered bread, the Rebbe demanded to speak with the prison warden. When one of the senior officers came to the cell, the Rebbe insisted that his tefillin be returned to him and also requested a visit from a doctor. The official told the Rebbe he could see a doctor no earlier than the next day, and concerning the tefillin: “Forget about that foolishness.” The Rebbe responded by going on a hunger strike until his tefillin were returned.
The Chasidim gathered in the Rebbe’s home early on the morning of the arrest, and by 10 a.m., the meeting moved to the Jewish Community Center. In attendance were representatives of every Jewish group except the Communists. They decided to concentrate their efforts within Russia. Tensions between Russia, Poland, and England caused them to fear that an international campaign might exacerbate the situation. Rebbetzin Nechama Dina, the Rebbe’s wife, took the lead. As Althaus writes, “She decided every matter, great and small. All decisions were hers.” The Rashag headed to Moscow to meet with Jewish leaders. Alter B. Metzger writes that in both Leningrad and Moscow, the Rebbe’s followers “concurred that pressure from abroad might worsen the situation. If the capitalists were supporting the Rebbe, that would be even greater proof of the Rebbe’s counterrevolutionary activities.”[[34: Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle.]]
On Thursday, two nights after the arrest, while the Rebbe was still fasting, the guards demanded that he remove his hat and hide his tzitzit. The Rebbe refused, telling them he was not frightened or intimidated by them. “The GPU can overcome the most obstinate person,” they retorted. They brought him in for interrogation; Nachmanson, Lulov, and two others were waiting. Later the Rebbe described the scene: “The interrogators’ hands rested on the weapons of destruction lying on the table, daggers in their eyes.”
The setting was designed to terrorize, but the Rebbe was not intimidated. Instead, he began to tell a story of a Maskil (a proponent of the enlightenment) who suffered a serious illness that lasted for three months, prompting his repentance and return to observance. The message was clear to the Jewish interrogators. But instead of taking it to heart, they responded with anger, mocking the Rebbe.
The interrogator outlined the Rebbe’s crimes: “You are abetting reactionary forces in the USSR and counterrevolution. You are a religious authority and rule over the Jews of the Soviet Union.” He went on to accuse him of influencing Soviet Jewish intelligentsia and bourgeois Americans[[35: The reference to the Americans probably hinted to the Rebbe’s connections to the JDC, which provided funding for his programs, and to his correspondence with Jewish leaders in the United States.]] by creating a network of Jewish educational and religious institutions and coercing religious Jews to support it, and by conducting foreign correspondence to strengthen religion in the Soviet Union, thereby opposing the Soviet government.
The Rebbe responded by saying, “Power and coercion are alien to the chasidic path. Among Chasidim, leadership implies spiritual stature that aspires to attain moral and spiritual excellence and to inspire others to follow that same path.”[[36: Reshimat HaMaasor, section 6.]] The Rebbe reminded his accusers that Soviet law does not ban the teaching of religion. The interrogation went on late into the night. As it ended, Lulov blurted out, “In twenty-four hours, you will be shot.”[[37: Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, chap. 8.]]
Exhausted after fasting for seventy-two hours, the Rebbe returned to his cell. Finally, on Friday,[[38: Friday, June 17, before sunset.]] after two nights and three days, a Jewish guard brought him his tefillin and books. The Rebbe told the officer that he refused to eat the non-kosher meals provided by the prison, and he asked for food from home. The officer mocked him for his request, but just before sunset, three loaves of uncut challah from home were delivered to his cell.
The ominous news of the looming death sentence reached the Chasidim on Shabbat, and it spurred them to expand the campaign and take it out from behind the scenes. Telegrams were dispatched to Soviet President Mikhail Kalinin and Prime Minister Alexei Rykov. A delegation of Jewish leaders attempted to meet with the head of the GPU, Vyacheslav Menzhinsky, but they were rebuffed. Across the country, hundreds of thousands of Jews signed petitions for the Rebbe’s release. Rabbis declared communal fasts on the Monday and Thursday following the Rebbe’s arrest.[[39: Jewish tradition teaches that in times of crisis, Jews should fast and add extra prayers. Communities will sometimes declare a public communal fast in response to impending calamity. See Maimonides, Mishneh Torah, Hilkhot Taanit (Laws of Fasting).]] Jews filled synagogues for extra prayers. One Chasid remembered feeling that “we observed Yom Kippur twice in one week.”
The news spread beyond the borders of Russia, sparking action. In Germany, the chief rabbi of Berlin, Dr. Meir Hildesheimer,[[40: Rabbi Dr. Meir Hildesheimer (1864–1934) was the chief rabbi of the Orthodox community of Berlin. Reform Rabbi Leo Baeck (1873–1956) was the head of the Reform community in Berlin. The fact that they joined together to lobby on behalf of the Rebbe reflects the gravity of the issue. In later years, Hildesheimer stood by the Rebbe’s side in his efforts to help Soviet Jews.]] joined the city’s Reform rabbi, Dr. Leo Baeck, to enlist the assistance of Dr. Oscar Cohn, a former member of the Reichstag, the German federal parliament. Hildesheimer met with the German foreign minister and then together they appealed to the Russian ambassador to Germany, who promised to do his utmost to help secure the Rebbe’s release.
To the American Chasidim, the Rebbe’s fate was unclear. Bits of unverified news drifted across the Atlantic, but details were sparse.[[41: Zikhron Livnei Yisrael – Memoirs of Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson: 1907–1939 [Hebrew] (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1996), chap. 25.]] The Chasidim in New York[[42: Established in 1924 to unite the Chabad synagogues in North America, Agudas Chassidei Chabad was still in its infancy.]] met to mobilize. They sent telegrams to government officials and Jewish organizations. Prominent New York attorney Sam Kramer[[43: Sam Kramer was the son of Max Kramer, one of the founders of Agudas Chassidei Chabad, the world headquarters of the Chabad movement.]] traveled to Washington, enlisting the help of Idaho Senator William Borah, among others.[[44: Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, chap. 25.]] There were some one hundred loosely connected Chabad congregations in America at the time,[[45: These synagogues were established by Russian immigrants who had an ancestral connection to Chabad. Many were called Nusach Ari, after the prayer book used in Chabad synagogues. The congregations created religious and social bonds that linked Jews in the new world with their friends and family. Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit 1900–1950 (History of Chabad in America) (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1988), chap. 26.]] “but many of the Chasidim had been living in the US for some years and did not understand the mortal danger the Rebbe was in,” says Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson, the head of Chabad’s US organization. “Nor did they feel the sense of gevalt (panic and crisis) that the Chasidim in Russia were experiencing.”[[46: Jacobson notes in his memoir that because at that time, he had only been in the US for a short period, and his political connections were therefore minimal; he was just getting to know the US scene. “I was only there a year and half. I couldn’t do much – I just cried.”]]
The Rebbe’s oldest daughter, Chana, sent a telegram with just two Yiddish words, “Tatte arestirt – Father was arrested” to Rabbi Dovid Meir Rabinowitz[[47: Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz (1863-1943) was originally a follower of the Rebbe Rashab and was devoted to the Rebbe. He visited the Rebbe in Poland and helped save him from Europe. He assisted the Rebbe in numerous projects and had an extensive correspondence with the Rebbe. Chasidim referred to him as the Radam. He came to the US in 1896, serving as a Rabbi in Boston and pioneering traditional Judaism and Jewish education.]] in Boston. He was a devoted Chabad Chasid who had immigrated to the US in 1896. One of his sons, Asher, was employed by the IRS in Boston, and another son, Peretz, was an attorney in nearby Springfield. Rabbi Rabinowitz directed Asher to take the train to Washington to lobby government officials to intercede on behalf of the Rebbe, and he told Peretz to go him when the train stopped at the Springfield station.[[48: As told by Rabbi Dovid Edelman, who served as a shliach in Springfield, Massachusetts from 1950 until his passing in 2015. He was a close friend of the Rabinowitz brothers and heard this story from them many times. The Chabad community in Springfield refers to the celebration of the Rebbe’s release as “The miracle in Springfield.” For more, see: https://collive.com/the-miracle-in-springfield/.]]
Asher’s work for the IRS had brought him to the nation’s capital many times; he was familiar with the political landscape. The brothers decided to seek the help of the most influential Jew at the time, Justice Louis Brandeis, who had been appointed to the Supreme Court eleven years earlier. The brothers tried to arrange an appointment but were told to return in another month, after the court’s session had ended. As they left the office, Justice Brandeis, who apparently knew Asher, spotted them in the hallway and asked why they were there. They informed him of the Rebbe’s arrest by the Soviets on charges of counterrevolutionary activity. Brandeis said he wanted to help, calling the Rebbe “the prince of Israel.”[[49: Rabbi Edelman always wondered how Brandeis, who came from an assimilated background, knew of the Rebbe and referred to him in such a distinguished fashion. One historical connection, though tangential, may give us a clue: One of the major influences on Brandeis’s support of Zionism was Aaron Aaronsohn, who lived in Zichron Yaakov, then in Palestine, and visited the US a few times. Aaronsohn was one of the organizers of the NILI Spy Ring that worked for the British against the Turks during World War I. His assistant and secretary was Lyova (Levi Yitzchak) Shneerson, a cousin of the Rebbe, who received an invitation to the wedding of the Rebbe’s daughter in 1929. Could Aaronsohn have introduced Brandeis to his secretary during his visit to Palestine in 1919? One can only wonder. For more, see Jonathan Sarna, Louis D. Brandeis: Zionist Leader, available at: https://www.brandeis.edu/hornstein/sarna/americanjewishcultureandscholarship/Archive4/LouisD.BrandeisZionistLeader.pdf and Marcy Oster, “Wedding invitation of Lubavitcher rebbe discovered at National Library of Israel,” JTA, available at: https://www.jta.org/2019/06/05/israel/wedding-invitation-of-lubavitcher-rebbe-discovered-at-national-library-of-israel.]] Apparently, Brandeis acted behind the scenes. Within a few days, the Russians received a strongly worded protest from the US government concerning the Rebbe’s arrest.[[50: In 1929–30, when the Rebbe visited the United States, he stopped in Springfield and thanked Peretz Rabinowitz for his role in saving his life, presenting him with a cigar as a token of appreciation. After Peretz’s passing, his family gave the cigar to Rabbi Dovid Edelman, who bequeathed it to his children; they still have the cigar in their possession today. In 1930, Asher Rabinowitz accompanied the Rebbe when he met with President Hebert Hoover in Washington (see chap. 7 of this book).]]
With the threat of a death sentence hanging over the Rebbe’s head, and little news from the prison, the Chasidim grew more anxious. The Rashag sent one of the Rebbe’s close Chasidim, Michoel Dvorkin, to Nevel[[51: Duchman, LeSheima Ozen, 201.]] to recruit the father of Mikhail Nachmanson, who had jailed the Rebbe. They asked him to travel to Leningrad to learn the Rebbe’s fate, but the elder Nachmanson was reluctant, arguing that his relationship with his son was frayed. Pressured by the local chasidic elder, Rabbi Zalman Moshe Yitzchaki, Nachmanson finally assented and reached out to his son for a meeting. Mikhail feared that being seen in public with his religiously dressed father would put him in jeopardy, so he arranged a clandestine encounter. The father sat on a bench in a public park while his son, not even acknowledging his presence, walked by and muttered two words in Yiddish: “Er lebt – He is alive.”[[52: Rabbi Mendel Futerfus, a close confident of Rabbi Zalman Moshe Yitzchaki, recounted the events years later. Menachem Zigelbaum, Sippur shel Chag (Kfar Chabad: 2011).]]
According to the GPU file recovered after the fall of the Soviet Union, the questioning continued for days. On June 21, the Rebbe was again interrogated. He stood firm, insisting that he was a rabbi before and after the revolution, a teacher of chasidic philosophy, and never involved in politics. When asked about the conference for Russian Jewry being organized by the Leningrad community, the Rebbe responded that he was against it. A few days later, on Shabbat, June 25, a postcard from the Rebbe was delivered to his home. He had been beaten repeatedly and was suffering excruciating pain. Despite it all, his message was upbeat. “I am well and feel good,” he wrote. The Rebbe asked his family to send him sefarim, including Likkutei Torah and a Chumash Bemidbar.
The Chasidim were successful in enlisting the help of the head of the Russian Red Cross, prominent human rights activist Madam Yekaterina Peshkova.[[53: Madam Yekaterina Peshkova (1887–1965). She was active in helping prisoners under the czars, and later the Communists. She had many political connections and even earned the trust of Lenin.]] She was the ex-wife of writer Maxim Gorky, a supporter of Lenin, and later Stalin. The international uproar when the Russian position on the world stage was tenuous, together with the grassroots lobbying and influence of Madam Peshkova, caused the GPU to rescind the Rebbe’s death sentence. But he was still in dire straits. The GPU decided to exile him for ten years to the isolated Solovki Islands[[54: A monastery was constructed in the Solovki Islands in the fifteenth century. In 1921, it was converted into the first Soviet prison camp for political prisoners, operating until the onset of war in 1939. S.A. Malsagoff, An Island Hell: A Soviet Prison in the Far North, trans. F.H. Lyon (London: 1926), available at: https://archive.org/details/1926AnIslandHellMalsagoff/mode/2up?view=theater.]] located in the remote northern White Sea. On Wednesday, June 29, a government official informed Rabbi Althaus that the Rebbe’s death sentence had been commuted and replaced with exile to the Solovki Islands. He was told that the family should bring him food and say goodbye. The Rebbe’s family came to the prison to see him off. Word of his exile spread quickly, and a crowd gathered outside the prison.
While the crowd waited outside, the Rebbe was called for his third interrogation. New accusations were added. Lulov continued to bully the Rebbe for the next few hours, to no avail. Finally, Lulov told the Rebbe that he would suffer greatly in exile. “You can save yourself from this punishment if you issue a proclamation saying you regret your anti-conference position. Give your blessing to the conference and you will walk out of here momentarily.” The Rebbe resolutely rejected his demand. “I have no regrets,” he said. “You can threaten me with serious punishments, but they will not influence my decision.”[[55: Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, 60, 145–46.]]
In the meantime, Madam Peshkova stepped up her efforts and successfully pressured the GPU to overturn its decree. Instead of being sent to the remote Solovki Islands, the Rebbe was sentenced to a three-year exile in Kostroma, a city on the Volga River.
The next day, Thursday, guards came to the Rebbe’s cell and ordered him to stand to hear his sentence. He refused and was severely beaten. They returned two more times, and each time the Rebbe refused to adhere to their orders and was beaten. Finally, the guards took him to an office, where Lulov informed him that he would be released from prison and exiled for three years to Kostroma. On the desk the Rebbe noticed a document from his file. First it had been marked “Death by firing squad.” That was crossed out and replaced with “Ten years in Solovki,” but that too was crossed out. The third line read “Three years in Kostroma.”[[56: Ibid., 146–47.]]
When the Chasidim heard the news, Rabbi Michoel Dvorkin immediately traveled to Kostroma to prepare for the Rebbe’s arrival.[[57: As related by Rabbi Michoel Dvorkin in a farbrengen in the home of Rabbi Binyamin Gorodetsky, June 18, 1947 (Rosh Chodesh Tamuz, 5707). Chronicled in the unpublished memoir of Rabbi Avraham Weingarten.]]
Kostroma is more than five hundred miles southeast of Leningrad and was then home to a tiny Jewish community.[[58: In recent years, the Jewish community in Kostroma has undergone a rebirth. “Kostroma Synagogue Celebrated 110th Birthday,” FJC, available at: https://fjc-fsu.org/kostroma-synagogue-celebrated-110th-birthday/.]] The Rebbe was told that he would be freed that very day, and he would be able to spend six hours with his family; that night he was to commence his journey to Kostroma. The train leaving Thursday evening would arrive in Kostroma on Shabbat, forcing the Rebbe to desecrate the holy day. The Rebbe realized their intentions and much to the shock of his jailers, he refused to leave the jail until the conclusion of Shabbat.[[59: The Rebbe told his jailers that he would not leave that day because the train journey might cause him to transgress Shabbat. They responded that if he chose to remain, they might decide to keep him imprisoned after all. He replied that he was prepared to stay in prison a long time rather than risking violating Shabbat. This raises a serious question: Jewish law states that one can transgress Shabbat to save a life. Clearly, the Rebbe’s life was in danger, in particular because of the threat that the imprisonment would be extended. The seventh Rebbe analyzed this question and answered that an argument can be made that the Rebbe would have been justified in leaving the prison; it would have been “a more pragmatic response to immediately leave the prison and then formulate strategies to avoid the Shabbat journey.” But he adds that had the Rebbe traveled on Shabbat, even though it might have been lifesaving, it might have been perceived by many as a capitulation to those whose intentions were to destroy religious life. Even in areas not connected to Jewish observance, “the Rebbe resolved that he would act steadfastly in any matter.” For full analyses, see Likkutei Sichot (Brooklyn, New York: Kehot Publication Society), 28:124; Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, appendix 9.]]
When the Chasidim became aware of the new obstacle, they rushed to Madam Peshkova and asked her to intervene. She met with Soviet Premier Alexei Rykov, who called Vyacheslav Menzhinsky, head of the secret police, who agreed to let the Rebbe remain in prison until Sunday morning, after which the authorities permitted him a short visit home.[[60: Zigelbaum, Sippur shel Chag, chap. 12.]]
On Sunday,[[61: July 3, 1927 (3 Tamuz, 5687).]] after nineteen days of imprisonment, the Rebbe was permitted to return home for a six-hour visit. Two of his Chasidim, Zalman Duchman and Yitzchak Minkowitz, met the Rebbe in his apartment. The Rebbe asked them if they had studied Chasidut while he was in prison. “We recited psalms,” they answered. The Rebbe told them, “I wrote maamarim until they took away my pencil.” Inmates were given paper to roll their own cigarettes, and the Rebbe used his to write down chasidic discourses. Now he asked Duchman and Minkowitz “to please transcribe them.”[[62: Sefer HaMaamarim mentions the names of two maamarim. One begins “Anokhi Hashem Elokekha,” and the second starts “Meheikhan zakhu Yisrael,” noting in the footnote that “they were written while in prison, and they have not been found.” Sefer HaMaamarim, 5687, 4th edition (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society). Also see Duchman, LeSheima Ozen, story 102; author’s interview with Yosef Minkowitz, grandson of Yitzchak Minkowitz.]]
At eight in the evening, he was to take the train to Kostroma. After seeing his family, the Rebbe headed to the Leningrad station for the long ride.[[63: During his hours at home, he met with Chasidim and informed them of the causes for the arrest: 1) He is the leader of all Chasidim in the world; 2) He establishes chadarim and yeshivas and fosters various religious activities in the country; 3) He is the authority of the Orthodox community in the entire land, and he also has an influence over the intelligentsia and the bourgeoisie both in Russia and abroad; and 4) Through his efforts, sizable sums arrive from abroad for those who study Torah.]]
At dusk, the Rebbe arrived at the station accompanied by his mother and his wife, and escorted by agents of the GPU and a cadre of soldiers. The station was filled with people who had gathered there, despite the danger, to bid farewell. Authorities stopped all ticket sales to prevent Chasidim from joining the Rebbe on the train. “No one discussed their plans to go to the station beforehand, since they all feared arrest,” Rabbi Mendel Meisel, who was there, told his grandson Avraham Zajac years later.[[64: Author’s interview with Rabbi Avraham Zajac.]] “Nonetheless, thousands came out of their concern for the Rebbe.”
The Jews of Leningrad arranged themselves like an honor guard in two rows, and the Rebbe walked between them toward the train.[[65: Duchman, LeSheima Ozen, 194.]] Ignoring the guards surrounding him, the Rebbe rose on the platform and gave a defiant speech to the assembled. He began by speaking of the state of Jews in the Diaspora:
This, all the nations of the world must know: Only our bodies were sent into exile and subjugated to alien rule; our souls were not given over into captivity and foreign rule. We must proclaim openly and before all that any matter affecting the Jewish religion, the Torah and its mitzvot and customs, is not subject to the coercion of others. No one can impose his belief upon us, nor coerce us to conduct ourselves contrary to our beliefs.[[66: Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, chap. 10.]]
The Rebbe was accompanied on his journey to Kostroma by his unmarried daughter Chaya Mussia, his son-in-law Rabbi Gurary, and Rabbi Eliyahu Althaus. Rabbi Dvorkin arrived Sunday night and started preparing for the Rebbe’s arrival. He repaired the local mikveh and opened a cheder for the children of the one hundred members of the local Jewish community; he also arranged housing for the Rebbe and his entourage at the home of the town shochet.
Roza Melamed was just twelve years old when her parents hosted the Rebbe in their home in Kostroma.[[67: She passed away in Beer Sheva at the age of 99 in 2014. She said that the Rebbe blessed her with long life. Dovid Margolin, “Roza Melamed, 99, Last Witness to Sixth Rebbe’s Soviet Exile in Kostroma, Russia,” available at: chabad.org/3382868.]] Her father, Yerachmiel Kugel, was the local shochet. The town’s small wooden synagogue, built in 1907, had been closed, so their large home became the synagogue. “We had thirteen Torah scrolls housed there and many books,” she remembered. “The Rebbe was an exceptionally good and kind person, with a kind soul. He really had something holy about him.” She recalled him constantly studying Torah and asking the children every day how they were doing. He blessed the family with good health and “that we should never come to know the suffering he had endured. When he spoke about what he had lived through, our hair stood on end.”[[68: Excerpt from interview with Jewish Educational Media, available at: chabad.org/1558543.]]
The Jews of Kostroma flocked to the Kugel home to see the Rebbe. Despite being weakened by his ordeal in prison, “the Rebbe received anyone who wished to see him.” Melamed recalled how the local watchmaker, Zelig Alekseyevich Rosenson, climbed the fence just to catch a glimpse of the Rebbe. He was awestruck by the Rebbe’s appearance, telling Roza, “I don’t have the right to even look upon his holy face.”
The welcome from local GPU officials was much more hostile. When the Rebbe reported to them the morning after his arrival, the official harshly told him, “You are a criminal receiving punishment for your activities against the Soviet government. Remember that.” The Rebbe was ordered to make a weekly appearance every Tuesday and forbidden from leaving the city.
The Chasidim continued their efforts to free the Rebbe from exile. A group in Moscow led by Madam Peshkova met with Soviet officials, who had been inundated with telegrams and messages from around the world. The head of the GPU in Leningrad, Jewish Communist Stanislav Messing,[[69: Some accounts claim Messing came from a chasidic family. He was shot in 1937.]] opposed the Rebbe’s release. At the same time that the Rebbe was arrested, other religious leaders had been detained. Messing told the delegation from Moscow, “If liberty is granted to the Rebbe, people will clamor that this entire matter is under Jewish control.” He threatened to countermand any order from Moscow to release the Rebbe and to arrest him again if he came back to Leningrad.
Finally, the efforts of Madam Peshkova, coupled with the international outcry, succeeded. On Tuesday, July 12, 1927 (12 Tamuz), the Rebbe appeared for his weekly visit to the GPU headquarters in Kostroma only to be informed by the officer on duty that it was a local holiday, and the station was closed. The Rebbe asked them to note the fact that he had come as required. Another officer overheard the conversation and told the Rebbe, “We received papers that you are being freed.” Rabbi Eliyahu Althaus, who was accompanying the Rebbe, was incredulous. “Are you playing with us?” he asked. To which the officer retorted, “With us there are no jokes.”[[70: “R. Elye Chayim Althaus’ Eyewitness Report of the Arrest of 1927,” available at: chabad.org/3382524; Zigelbaum, Sippur shel Chag, 288.]]
The telegram from Moscow granting freedom to the Rebbe was received that day; the formal document was issued the next day.[[71: See Zigelbaum, Sippur shel Chag, 290, for a copy of the telegram informing the GPO headquarters in Moscow of the unconditional release of the Rebbe.]] Chaya Moussia called the family in Leningrad and shared the news of the release, telling her older sister Chana, “We are coming for Shabbat – bli pirsum [it should not be publicized].”[[72: Deposition of Chaya Moussia Schneerson, November 12, 1985, p. 36.]] In remote Kostroma, the local Jews gathered to celebrate, and to mark the day, the Rebbe taught a maamar.[[73: The maamar was based on Psalms 118:7, “G-d aided me, and I shall see [revenge taken] on my enemies.” The maamar was said on the day the Rebbe received the news of his release. It focuses on the concept that G-d helps man in his efforts; when a person stands up for principles of Torah, a spiritual light emanates from above that automatically causes evil to dissipate. The next day, in honor of his actual release, the Rebbe said a second maamar, “Barukh HaGomel,” based on the blessing one makes when he is saved from prison or illness. Sefer HaMaamarim, 5687–88 (Brooklyn, New York: Kehot Publication Society, 2022).]]
The entire Kostroma community came out to bid farewell to the Rebbe. “They gave him a grand escort,” remembered Melamed. Two days later,[[74: July 14, 1927.]] the Rebbe arrived in Leningrad, despite concerns that he could be arrested once again. News of the Rebbe’s liberation could not be suppressed, and it spread quickly to Jewish communities across the Soviet Union. Rabbi Yehuda Chitrik recalled the celebration in his hometown of Kharkiv, Ukraine: “Rabbi Hillel Levin in Kharkiv received a telegram with the good tidings. Messengers spread all over town to share the news. Within hours, Chasidim had gathered in the home of Rabbi Aharon Tomarkin to celebrate. The celebration continued the next day.”[[75: Yehuda Leib Chitrik, Reshimot Devarim 1:195.]]
Even with all the pain and suffering he had endured, the Rebbe saw his imprisonment as something of a test from above. He reflected on its significance:
Divine providence sometimes arranges special periods that change a person’s character, developing his abilities and giving him a lofty perspective from which he can behold the ultimate purpose of human life on this earth. A person’s spiritual progress and the development of his abilities are affected most strongly by a period rich in suffering and persecution for his diligent and passionate work for an ideal, and especially when one is struggling with and battling his persecutors and oppressors for the survival and strengthening of his religion.
He noted the exact duration of the imprisonment: eighteen days, eleven hours, and fifteen minutes.
Considering the great spiritual value that came in its wake, it is appropriate not just to mark the days and nights, but also the hours and minutes [of arrest and imprisonment], for every hour and moment of suffering, mortification, and affliction brings tremendous reward and infinite fortitude of mind – even a weak person is transformed into the mightiest of the mighty.[[76: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 3, letter dated May 7, 1934 (17 Iyar, 5694); Metzger, trans., The Heroic Struggle, appendix 3.]]
A year after his release, the Rebbe explained in a public letter that his release was a “festival of liberation for those who love the Torah and observe its commands, and so too for all those who merely bear the name ‘Jew,’ for the heart of every man of Israel [irrespective of his particular level of observance of the mitzvot] is perfectly bound with G-d and His Torah.”[[77: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter dated June 3, 1928 (15 Sivan, 5688), available at: chabad.org/2333919.]] Since then, the twelfth of Tamuz is celebrated annually in Jewish communities across the world.
Stung by Moscow’s overruling of its plans to end the Rebbe’s life, the Yevesektzia still had its eyes on him. Only a small number of Chasidim joined the Rebbe for services on his first Shabbat back in Leningrad, during which he recited the HaGomel blessing[[78: The traditional Jewish prayer of thanksgiving recited after being released from prison, surviving a major illness, successfully crossing the ocean, or escaping from a dangerous situation. Customarily, it is said after the Torah reading.]] said after one’s release from prison. A few days later, the Yevesektzia paper, Der Emes, demanded the Rebbe be exiled to Siberia. Clearly, remaining in Leningrad was not an option, though the Rebbe was at risk anywhere in Russia. To step away from the public eye, the Rebbe relocated to Malakhovka, a small town outside Moscow, and instructed the Chasidim to restrict their visits.
If the Rebbe remained in Russia, imprisonment or even death were real risks, but leaving Russia was a difficult step to take. The Rebbe felt personal responsibility for Russian Jewry, and the country had been the center of Chasidism for two centuries.[[79: Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov (1698–1760) was the founder of the chasidic movement. He lived in Medzhybizh, Ukraine. His successor, Rabbi Dovber, the Maggid, lived in Mezeritch, also in Ukraine. The Alter Rebbe, the founder of Chabad, lived in the town of Liadi in Russia, and his son Rabbi Dovber, the Mitteler Rebbe, moved to Lubavitch, where the movement was centered for 102 years. Later, the fifth Rebbe, the Rashab, moved to Rostov because of the German invasion during World War I. The Rayatz lived there and then relocated to St. Petersburg (Leningrad).]] As one of the Rebbe’s confidants, Rabbi Yechezkel Feigin,[[80: Letter from Feigin to Rabbi Eliyahu Simpson and Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson dated 27 Menachem Av, 5687 (August 25, 1927). Feigin’s letter carries a great sense of urgency, imploring them to act quickly. He writes cryptically, “He must get out of his sickness, he requires expert doctors, and he needs to travel to Mordechai. The illness created expenses that you cannot imagine.” This was code for the fact that the Rebbe was still in mortal danger, and he must relocate to Riga, the residence of Mordechai Dubin. There were major expenses connected to fighting to free the Rebbe from prison, keeping the institutions afloat, and relocating outside Russia.]] wrote to Chabad supporters in America, the danger to the Rebbe’s life was serious and “miracles do not happen every day. We must make every effort to prevent further sickness [code for prison], from which he might not return.” Rabbi Althaus echoed those same anxieties ten days after the Rebbe’s release. “The dread that we experienced in the past continues to hover over us in the days ahead, for who knows what each new day will bring?”[[81: “R. Elye Chayim Althaus’ Eyewitness Report of the Arrest of 1927,” available at: chabad.org/3382524.]]
As the High Holidays neared, the Rebbe pondered the idea of leaving Russia. He made his final decision after embarking on a spiritual pilgrimage to pray at the grave of his father, the Rebbe Rashab, in Rostov.[[82: He was accompanied by his daughter Chaya Mushka. Oberlander and Shmotkin, Early Years, 208–9.]] Though he resolved to depart, it was not done willingly. “I was forced to leave Russia,” he later wrote. “My heart and soul are with the anash and temimim in our country.”[[83: The letter was addressed to “my dear friends anash and the temimim in the country of my birth, Russia.” In the letter, the Rebbe refers to Russia as “our country” and recounts the persecution of the Yevesektzia because of his efforts to strengthen Torah. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter dated 19 Kislev, 5687 (December 13, 1927).]]
The Russians refused to grant the Rebbe an exit visa – even Madam Peshkova’s intercession with the Russian government encountered strong opposition. Nor had any country agreed to provide a haven for the Rebbe. In addition, funds were needed to relocate the Rebbe and his family, and in Russia there was no way to secure the funds. The money would have to come from overseas.
Nearby Latvia would be the key to the Rebbe’s freedom.[[84: For a detailed description of the efforts to secure an exit visa, see Dovid Margolin, “The Chassidic Member of Parliament Who Stood Up to the Soviets,” available at: chabad.org/5995678.]] The Riga Jewish community formally invited[[85: On the 23 Menachem Av, 5687 (August 21, 1927).]] the Rebbe to become its chief rabbi. Mordechai Dubin,[[86: Rabbi Mordechai Dubin (1889-1957) was the head of the Jewish community of Riga and a member of the Latvian Parliament. He was a Chasid of the Rebbe and assisted him in communal affairs. For more, see Avraham Godin, “Latvian-Jewish Statesman, Chassid and Martyr: Mordechai Dubin,” available at: chabad.org/3995713.]] a member of the Latvian Parliament and a Chabad Chasid, presented the letter to the Russian officials, who rejected the request. At the same time, Dr. Oscar Cohn, who had served as an attorney to the Soviet Legation in Germany, presented an invitation to Russian officials on behalf of the Frankfurt Jewish community, asking the Rebbe to assume a post there.[[87: Behind the scenes, Dubin in Latvia and Cohn in Germany coordinated their efforts. At one point, Dubin told Russian officials that Latvian Jews would be offended if the Russians allowed the Rebbe to go to Germany. Margolin, “Chassidic Member of Parliament,” chabad.org/5995678.]]
A friendship and commerce treaty between Russia and Latvia had been signed but still needed to be ratified by the Latvian Parliament. The agreement was important to Russia, which was still diplomatically isolated, as England had cut off ties after discovering Russian espionage, and US diplomatic recognition would not come until 1933. According to Chassidic historian Dovid Margolin the Soviets were threatened by Baltic states, “A trade deal with the Latvians, in other words, was a step towards peeling them away from the West, which was the Russians’ main objective.[[88: Latvia was one of the few countries that had officially recognized the Communist country. The trade agreement between Russia and Latvia was vital to the Russian economy. Dovid Margolin writes: “On June 2, 1927, Latvia signed a trade deal with the Soviet Union. Though economically, Latvia needed this deal much more than the Russians did, the Bolsheviks had their own reasons for seeing the deal through. Yet, due to well-founded fears of Soviet encroachment on Latvia – after all, the country had been a Russian territory for some 150 years prior to the revolution – there was strong internal Latvian opposition to the deal, and it still needed to be ratified by the Saeima (Latvian parliament).” Dubin’s party at that point held two seats in parliament. Margolin, “Chassidic Member of Parliament,” chabad.org/5995678.]] Dubin’s swing vote in the parliament was crucial to the agreement, and he was able to hold it up – unless Russia permitted the Rebbe to leave. With the trade agreement at risk and international pressure mounting, the Russians capitulated.
The Russian government granted exit visas to the Rebbe and his close family. But the Rebbe demanded that other key Chasidim also be permitted to leave, including his future son-in-law, the Ramash.[[89: When asked by authorities why he couldn’t simply find another son-in-law overseas, the Rebbe reportedly responded, “Such a son-in-law cannot be found.”]] The Rebbe also insisted that his priceless library, which included many original manuscripts, historical documents, and intellectual treasures, accompany him.[[90: Eventually this library became the core of the library of Agudas Chassidei Chabad in New York. Today, it contains over 300,000 items and is considered one of the premier Jewish libraries in the world. For more about the library’s history, see: https://chabadlibrary.org/about-e.pdf and chap. 8 of this book.]] “It represented the historical legacy of Chabad,” says Professor Michael Berenbaum of the American Jewish University.[[91: Author’s interview with Berenbaum.]] Government bureaucrats initially opposed both requests, but after intensive lobbying, they relented.
The last holiday the Rebbe celebrated with his Chasidim in Russia was Simchat Torah in October 1927. It was the final opportunity for Russian Chasidim to see the Rebbe, and despite the risk of arrest, Chasidim flocked to Leningrad. Zalman Bronstein recalls, “We all wanted to see the Rebbe before he left. The synagogue, whose normal capacity was six hundred, swelled with Chasidim who packed the room. Chasidim were pushed into every corner, everyone sweltering from the overcrowding.” This last visit was deeply emotional. “It was difficult for the Chasidim to separate from the Rebbe and difficult for the Rebbe to separate from his children, his beloved Chasidim.”[[92: Interview with Zalman Bronstein, a student in the Nevel yeshivah whose family lived in Nikolaev. He joined his father in Leningrad for the Rebbe’s last Simchat Torah in Russia. Zigelbaum, Sippur shel Chag, 316.]]
During the holiday, the Rebbe urged his Chasidim, “Don’t fear anyone. Each of you should seek to influence those in your community. As the Talmud says, a person who teaches Torah to a child is considered the child’s own parent.” The Chasidim and the Rebbe cried, sang, and inspired each other throughout the holiday. “I will be with you,” the Rebbe consoled the crowd. Summing up the feelings of many, one Chasid, Rabbi Meir Simcha Chein, broke out in tears at the last farbrengen saying, “The Rebbe is going, and we are left here.”[[93: As told by his grandson Dovid Chein, who was in Leningrad at the time. Zigelbaum, Sippur shel Chag.]]
Zalman Duchman was at the packed train station. “The platform was black from the crowd – hundreds and hundreds of people,” he wrote. Dvorah Konikov, then a young girl, was brought by her parents to see the Rebbe off. Her mother lifted her up and told her in Yiddish, “Kuk – Look!” She caught a glimpse of the Rebbe. “I remember his fiery reddish beard,” she says.[[94: Author’s interview with Konikov. Her family relocated to the US, and in 1946 she married Yitzchok Groner. They went on to spearhead the Chabad expansion in Australia.]] Police officers had to make way for the Rebbe to get to the train. “This was the toughest moment. We all knew that the Rebbe was leaving us, and we wondered when we would see him again,” remembers Yaakov Abisov. His father turned to the Rebbe in a broken voice and begged, “Bless me!” The Rebbe turned around, looking intently at Yaakov’s father, and said, “Your children should remain Jews.”[[95: Zigelbaum, Sippur shel Chag.]]
Standing on the steps of the train, the Rebbe’s anguish was palpable as he turned to his Chasidim and blessed them one more time. Rabbi Dovid Chein heard his last words. “Whoever wants a bond with me will not make any compromises,” he said. “It will be very difficult, but that is the condition.” Those words, Chein says, left a lasting impression on his father Yehuda, who was faced with many challenges in the coming years. Whenever it became difficult, he would say, “The Rebbe told me that whoever wants to be united with him should not make any compromises. I do not want to be separated from the Rebbe.”
Zalman Duchman describes the last moments of the Rebbe’s departure: “When the train started moving, it was going very slowly, and all the people were walking after the train. Then the train started going faster and the whole crowd started running. We ran alongside the train. Everybody at the station was crying – you could see the tears falling, and not one dry eye.”[[96: Duchman, LeSheima Ozen, chap. 2.]] As the train pulled away from the station, the Chasidim sang together the melody “The Beinoni.”[[97: Composed by Reb Aharon Charitonov, the Rebbe cherished this song and would sing it at farbrengens with his Chasidim. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4I37Gk-1GLs.]]
Many Chasidim purchased tickets to travel with the Rebbe until the last station before the border. At a number of stations along the route, crowds gathered to bid farewell, and many boarded the train. As it drew closer to the Russian border, the cars rang with the sound of chasidic melodies marking the Russian Chasidim’s last moments with the Rebbe.
While the Rebbe was making his way to Riga, Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson was camped out in the offices of the Kramer brothers in New York. He had been pleading with them to wire $4,000 (the equivalent of $60,000 today) to Mordechai Dubin in Riga. The Rebbe’s relocation had been expensive, pressing debts lingered from his incarceration, and the operation of the underground educational system in Russia required ongoing support. In New York, Rabbi Eliyahu Simpson[[98: Rabbi Eliyahu Simpson (1889–1976) was one of the key figures in the development of Chabad in the United States. He studied in the yeshivah in Lubavitch, where he became one of the chozrim (those who memorized and transcribed the maamarim) of the Rebbe Rashab. In 1923, he immigrated to the United States, where he served as the rabbi of the Chabad synagogue in Boro Park. After the arrival of the Rebbe Rayatz in 1940, he became a secretary to the Rebbe.]] had secured some funding, but more was needed. The Kramers, Chaim Zalman and Avraham Dov, were strong supporters of the Rebbe, but Jacobson’s demands were high. At first, they agreed to send one thousand dollars, then another five hundred. They told Jacobson, “Let’s wait until Monday to deal with this. It’s Friday, and Shabbat is soon.” Jacobson was deeply troubled, as Dubin had wired a message saying that the situation was critical. “It pained my heart. I turned to them and said, ‘I am not leaving until you wire the money.’” At first they brushed him off, but when they realized that Jacobson was serious, they agreed and wired the funds.[[99: Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, chap. 25.]]
In the years to come, it would become clear that the Rebbe’s seven-year ordeal under the Communist regime was but one chapter in their conflict. He continued to orchestrate and support the spiritual resistance in the decades that followed, and the battle he waged had far-reaching historical repercussions both in the Soviet Union and beyond. The clandestine system started by the Rebbe Rayatz in the early 1920s endured, despite the harassment, imprisonment, and even execution of many key activists.
In 1946, the network orchestrated the audacious escape of one thousand Chasidim across the border to Poland on false passports.[[100: David Eliezrie, The Secret of Chabad, chap. 4.]] They and their children provided the leadership necessary to create a global Jewish renaissance, and they were an inspiration to a new generation of Chasidim growing up in the postwar era.
In 1949, future Prime Minister Golda Meir encountered the underground when she was appointed Israel’s first ambassador to Russia. Meir was far from religious but felt that as a representative of Israel, it was appropriate to attend services for the High Holidays. On the first day of Rosh HaShanah, she went to Moscow’s Choral Synagogue, finding only a small group of elderly Jews gathered. Disappointed, she wondered if she should return the next day. She decided to go, and as she drew near the synagogue, she was surprised to be welcomed by thousands of Jews filling the streets. Years later, she told Italian reporter Oriana Fallaci, “It was Chabad that orchestrated the welcome of thousands.”[[101: Author’s interview with Ambassador Yehuda Avner, who was with Prime Minister Meir when she met a group of soldiers during the Yom Kippur War in the Golan Heights. It had been a brutal battle with the Syrians, and one of the soldiers asked Meir, “Is it worth it to keep fighting for a state?” She responded with the story about the crowd at the synagogue in Moscow, explaining that she was deeply touched by the show of Jewish solidarity and insisting that Jews should stand together. Avner was also with Meir when she was interviewed by Fallaci. In that conversation, she added the detail that Chabad had orchestrated the massive crowds of people in Moscow on the second day of Rosh HaShanah. Avner said that Meir also told Fallaci that she was inspired by the outpouring of Jews on the streets, and “this was the one time in my life that I considered becoming religious.”]]
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzchak Shamir discovered the network a few years after Meir. In his keynote address at a Tel Aviv memorial service for the seventh Lubavitcher Rebbe in 1994, he recalled visiting Russia in the early 1950s, when he was an operative for Israel’s spy agency, the Mossad.[[102: As heard personally by the author at the event.]] Israel had decided to reach out to Jewish communities in the Soviet Union and, using diplomatic cover, agents were dispatched to the Israeli embassy in Moscow to connect with them.[[103: Lishkat Hakesher, a division of the Israeli Secret Service directly controlled by the Office of the Prime Minister, was first headed from 1953–70 by Shaul Avigur. Its mission was to strengthen Jewish life in Russia and assist with immigration to Israel. The Israelis worked closely with the Chabad secret system in Russia. Its activities in Russia were terminated in the wake of the Six-Day War in 1967, when Russia broke diplomatic relations with Israel. After the Six-Day War, Lishkat Hakesher became the key orchestrator of the worldwide campaign for Soviet Jewry, including public demonstrations against the Russian government. The seventh Rebbe disagreed with the policy of public confrontation with the Soviet Union, feeling quiet diplomacy would be more effective. In recent years, Lishkat Hakesher has been reconstituted. Today it functions as Nativ, which helps Jews from the former Soviet Bloc immigrate to Israel. On the cooperation of Chabad and Lishkat Hakesher, see Eliezrie, The Secret of Chabad, chap. 9.]] Shamir said, “We were surprised to discover that in every city across Russia, there was an existing clandestine Jewish network being directed by the [seventh] Rebbe in New York.” Shamir’s discovery evolved into a clandestine partnership between the Mossad and the Rebbe’s network in Russia.
The network surreptitiously imported aid packages that included food and other goods that could be sold on the black market. Religious items, such as matzah for Passover, tefillin, Jewish books, and ink for writing Torah scrolls, were in high demand.[[104: In the 1970s, the Soviets banned a matzah shipment organized by American Jewish groups. Afterward, those groups publicized the ban, embarrassing the Russian government. Simultaneous Chabad shipments got through the Iron Curtain because they were kept from the public eye.]] Starting in the 1960s, when tourism from the West became possible, rabbis, educators, and businesspeople were sent from abroad to secretly connect with, inspire, and educate Jews in Russia. They brought with them goods to be sold, sustaining families who lost their source of income because they had applied for exit visas.[[105: When the famed Chasid Rabbi Mendel Futerfas left Russia in 1963, he asked the Rebbe if he should have stayed to continue helping Russian Jewry. The Rebbe told him to help from afar. Futerfas gathered some of his Russian refugee friends in New York, including Rabbi Moshe Levertov, and they established the organization Ezras Achim (literally, “assisting brothers”) for just that purpose. In the coming years, they sent thousands of packages of food, religious items, and goods to be sold on the black market to sustain the Russian Jews, many of whom had lost their jobs because they dared apply to emigrate or were openly observant. Often, Ezras Achim sent these packages with Westerners posing as tourists or businessmen who were on secret missions to Russia to help Soviet Jews.]]
The underground was instrumental in nurturing the Russian Jewish renaissance that was triggered by Israel’s victory in the Six-Day War in 1967. Inspired by the victory, young Russian Jews began to explore their heritage. Many of those seeking greater knowledge became students of Chabad rabbis, who were still educating the youth after decades of harassment. One of those young people was Yuli Edelstein, later speaker of the Israeli Knesset. As a young man in Russia, he began to explore his Jewish identity, eventually himself becoming a Hebrew teacher, for which he was sentenced on false charges to a Siberian prison camp for three years. Speaking at the International Conference of Chabad-Lubavitch Shluchim in 2015, he paid tribute to the Chabad underground in Moscow led by Rabbi Getche Vilensky and Rabbi Mottel Lipshitz, who was then the city’s only shochet and mohel. “They were my inspiration on my journey to Jewish observance,” Edelstein said.[[106: Video of Edelstein’s remarks available at: https://www.torahcafe.com/mr-yuli-edelstein/greetings-at-the-kinus-hashluchim-banquet-5775-video_c428e54ae.html.]]
As Jews began leaving Russia in the 1970s, Russian Chabad activists who had been raised in Russia and educated secretly there moved to the West and created new Jewish centers for Russian immigrants.[[107: Most major Jewish communities have Jewish centers catered to Russian Americans that are directed by Chabad shluchim who are themselves Russian. For instance, Rabbi Yosef Zaltzman directs the Jewish Russian Community Center of Ontario. He was educated in a secre Ezras Achim t Jewish school in Samarkand, Uzbekistan in his youth. See https://www.jrcc.org.]]
With the fall of the Soviet Union, the network emerged from the shadows. Starting in 1990, the seventh Rebbe (who was living in New York) dispatched a series of young rabbis and rebbetzins to rekindle Jewish life in Russia. They linked up with the activists on the ground, who had been operating clandestinely for decades. That year, the first public menorah lighting took place in Moscow’s Red Square. In the coming years, Chabad rabbis reclaimed historic synagogues in cities across Russia, opened schools, set up social service and cultural centers, and recreated the glory of Jewish life that had existed for centuries in Russia. Today, Chabad is the premier force in Jewish life in the former Soviet Union.[[108: David Biale et al., Hasidism: A New History (Princeton University Press, 2018), 595; Eliezrie, The Secret of Chabad, chap. 10.]]
This fulfilled the prediction of the Rebbe Rashab that the Rayatz recorded in his diary in 1926:[[109: Sefer HaSichos, 5680–5687, 2nd edition (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2004), 132.]] There would be a period of “dark clouds,” but Judaism would survive. “Three weeks before his passing, my father called me into his study and said, ‘There will be difficult times; you will need to have mesirat nefesh bepoel (actual self-sacrifice). But eventually, the Communist government will disintegrate.’”[[110: See chap. 3 of this book.]]

