When Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson entered the Rebbe’s study on Saturday night, he had no inkling that five days later, the war would engulf Poland.[[1: The audience with the Rebbe was on Saturday evening, August 26, 1939 (11 Elul, 5799) in Otwock. The war broke out the following Friday morning, September 1, 1939. “Journey to America,” Di Yiddishe Heim, issue no. 33, Autumn 5726 (1966).]] He had escorted six students from New York to the yeshivah two weeks earlier, and now he was preparing to return home. That night the primary topic of discussion was the idea that had been brewing for a decade: the Rebbe’s relocation to the US. The Rebbe had finally resolved to make the move, telling Jacobson, “I wrote Rabbi Shmuel Levitin asking if a Lubavitcher yeshivah could succeed in the US, and he responded yes.” That assessment was affirmed by the success of the US students at the yeshivah in Otwock.[[2: Dovid Zaklikowski, Kosher Investigator: How Rabbi Berel Levy Built the OK and Transformed the World of Kosher Supervision (Brooklyn, NY: Hasidic Archives, 2017), 28.]] When the first group came in 1938, yeshivah administrators feared the pampered Americans might not adapt, but they had done well. The Rebbe told Jacobson, “From the students that you have brought I see there is no problem – we can have a fine Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim in America.” Jacobson assured the Rebbe that the community would support his work. The Rebbe’s decision was firm. “Arrange everything systematically and on a solid basis. In about half a year, with G-d’s assistance, we will come to America.”[[3: Kfar Chabad, issue no. 1,362, p. 30. It seems the Rebbe was apprehensive about the Jewish future in Poland even earlier. When Simcha Yitzchak Zajac asked the Rebbe about moving to Brazil in 1934 to be a shochet, the Rebbe told him, “Poland is not a place for Jews anymore. You should go to Brazil and improve kosher slaughter.” Interview with Mordechai Zajac, JEM Oral History Project.]]
The Rebbe wasn’t just going to move, he was going to change his focus. He told Jacobson, “I am entering my sixth decade. The last time I was in the US [referring to his 1929–30 visit], I was involved in strengthening traditional Judaism, and thank G-d, I was successful. This time my intentions are to teach Chasidism and take care of the Chasidim.”[[4: Di Yiddishe Heim, issue no. 64, Summer 1975; Zikhron Livnei Yisrael – Memoirs of Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson: 1907–1939 [Hebrew] (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1996), 226.]] The Rebbe’s sixtieth birthday was ten months away, and he was weakened by his ordeal in Russia and Poland as well as acute health challenges. “I want to be a Rebbe for Chasidim, not a Rebbe for the whole world,” he said.[[5: Recalled by Rabbi Jacobson to Rabbi Shalom Ber Levitan, author’s interview with Levitan.]] In America, the Rebbe’s goal would be to open a yeshivah and focus inward on the chasidic community.
The Rebbe told Rabbi Jacobson not to linger in Otwock; he wanted him to leave the next morning. Jacobson was scheduled to sail later that week on the Queen Mary, departing from France. But with the border now closed, Jacobson was forced to take a roundabout route via Hungary, Yugoslavia, and Italy, only reaching Paris ten days later and missing the departure of the Queen Mary. By then, Germany had invaded Poland. Jacobson was desperate to get home, realizing that only US intervention could save the Rebbe. Finally, he secured a berth on a ship leaving for the United States, which turned out to be a cot in the ship’s swimming pool locker room, as it was overcrowded with Americans fleeing Europe. They celebrated Rosh HaShanah at sea with Rabbi Jacobson leading the services on deck, finally arriving in New York more than two weeks after the war had started.
Jacobson immediately sprang into action, launching a campaign to save the Rebbe. It would involve Chabad activists in Brooklyn, government officials in Washington, Chasidim in Riga, diplomats in Berlin, the Abwehr (German naval intelligence service), and soldiers from the Wehrmacht – many of Jewish background. They would have to overcome the overt anti-Semitism of US officials who objected to Jewish immigration, and evade the Gestapo, who saw the Rebbe as a high-value target. They would have to discover the Rebbe’s whereabouts in war-torn Poland and transport him, his family, and key followers across the border through Nazi Germany to Latvia, and eventually to refuge in the United States. Throughout all this, the Rebbe endeavored to help as many of his students as possible escape Poland, and he continued to reach out to other Jews, attempting to help them find an avenue of salvation from the Nazi onslaught.
Thursday nights in Chabad yeshivas are traditionally reserved for late-night study review. At times, a chasidic farbrengen is held, which can last the entire night. The evening before the world was devastated by war[[6: August 31, 1939 (16 Elul, 5799).]] was no different. In Otwock, Avraham Garfinkel[[7: Interview with Avraham Garfinkel, JEM Oral History Project.]] spent the night with his fellow students at a farbrengen marking the yeshivah’s founding thirty-two years earlier. As the students sang melodies and listened to words of Torah and chasidic stories, none of them imagined that their world of camaraderie, Torah study, and inspiration would be shattered at daybreak. The celebration finished as the sun began to rise that Friday morning. They were unaware that at 4:45 a.m., a German battleship began shelling Gdańsk. Shortly afterward, led by columns of panzer tanks, a million and a half German solders invaded Poland. At 8:00 a.m., as the students were getting ready for morning prayers, German planes began bombing Otwock.
“Thunderous sounds were suddenly heard,” recalled Garfinkel. The students ran outside to find people screaming, “Don’t you see? It’s war!” Avraham Hecht, one of the six recently arrived American students, described the shock. “It was a pleasantly warm summer day with a cloudless sky and mild sunshine. My attention was once again interrupted by the disturbing sound of airplanes streaking across the sky.”[[8: Rabbi Avraham B. Hecht, My Spiritual Journey (Brooklyn, NY: 2006), 65.]] Outside, Hecht saw German bombers raining death and destruction on the town. In an instant, the world changed forever. “A deafening explosion rocked our building and shattered its window.”
The war came as a surprise, says Garfinkel. “At first, we didn’t want to believe it.” There had been some talk of war, but there was much skepticism. “Many thought that in the months leading to the conflict, Hitler was conducting a war of nerves and was in fact not prepared for actual war,” wrote Rabbi Pinchas Hirschsprung, who lived in the small Polish town of Dukla.[[9: Rabbi Pinchas Hirschsprung (1912–98), born in Poland, was a brilliant student at Yeshivas Chachmei Lublin. He became a renowned scholar and the chief rabbi of Montreal. His memoir, The Vale of Tears, was originally published in Yiddish in 1944. It is unique in Holocaust literature since it was published during the war, while the memories were still fresh.]] “The prevailing thought was that Hitler’s threats were designed to win more concessions, and Jews held on to the hope there would be no war.”
That was the Rebbe’s view too. Earlier that summer, some of the parents of US students planning to come to Otwock expressed concern about traveling to Poland. The Rebbe responded to one of the boys, Mordechai Fisher, “You have nothing to fear.”[[10: Hecht, My Spiritual Journey, 47–48.]] With that assurance, they boarded[[11: Jacobson personally escorted six students from the US to Poland to attend the yeshivah. They departed the US on August 9, 1939 (24 Av, 5699).]] the Isle de France with Rabbi Jacobson, arriving at the yeshivah just seventeen days before the conflict started. The day the war broke out, the Rebbe told the American students, “I did not foresee it.”[[12: Author’s interview with Avraham Hecht.]]
Hecht says they were “bewildered by the horrendous chain of events.” They reached the American Consul, who advised them, “Germany just issued an official declaration of war. I strongly advise you to travel immediately to Warsaw, and we will arrange your return to safety.” They verified that travel to Riga, capital of neutral Latvia, was possible. Shortly after noon they headed out, stopping off at the Rebbe’s residence before they departed.
Avraham Hecht[[13: Ibid.]] vividly remembers that moment. “We entered the study where the Rebbe was sitting regally, already dressed in his silk Shabbat garments.” The Rebbe bid them farewell. Since they had American passports, they had freedom of movement, and the Rebbe directed them to travel as soon as possible to neutral Latvia. “I’m sending you to my Chasidim in Riga, Latvia,” he said, telling them to remain calm. “Reb Mordechai Cheifetz will make arrangements for you.” The Rebbe asked one of the students, Meir Greenberg, to relay a request to Mordechai Dubin in Riga “to arrange that the Latvian government should request a permit for the Rebbe to leave Poland with his family, since the Rebbe and his family are Latvian citizens.” The American students would be traveling in a war zone. One of the students asked the Rebbe, “What should we do if we need to desecrate the Shabbat?” The Rebbe quickly responded, “The merit of the two tzaddikim whose birthdays fall out on Chai Elul,[[14: That Shabbat was Chai (18) Elul on the Jewish calendar. It marks the birthday of the founder of the chasidic movement, Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov in 1698, and Chabad’s founder Rabbi Schneur Zalman of Liadi in 1745.]] the Baal Shem Tov and Rabbi Schneur Zalman, is sufficient that you will not need to transgress this Shabbat.”
The Americans first went to nearby Warsaw where, according to Mordechai Altein, “The US Consulate refused assistance because they were chasidic Jews.” A JDC representative saw the stranded Americans outside the consulate and intervened, suggesting they go to the Hotel Britannia. “He got a wheelbarrow and helped us move our stuff,” Hecht remembers. By then it was after nightfall, but the hotel owner refused them accommodation unless they would sign the registration form. The students debated what to do. Shloma Zalman Hecht insisted “that since the Rebbe said they won’t have to desecrate the Shabbat, they shouldn’t sign the form.”[[15: At the hotel, the students had a heated discussion about whether they should transgress Shabbat by signing the forms. Meir Greenberg and Mottel Altein walked to the home of Warsaw’s leading rabbi, Menachem Zemba, to ask him what to do. Rabbi Zemba insisted that they should first make Kiddush, and he ruled that past 11:00 p.m. it was dangerous to go outside, saying that at that point they should sign in a manner that would entail breaking the rules of Shabbat based on a rabbinic decree, not an actual biblical prohibition.]]
That turned out to be fortuitus. A religious Jew found them a haven in a small, ramshackle guesthouse a short distance away. There, Greenberg met a classmate from New York’s Yeshivah Torah Vodaath. He asked Greenberg if the group could take a large sum of money to America – the exact amount needed for train tickets to Riga. On Sunday morning, Greenberg’s friend purchased the tickets[[16: The students repaid him when they got to America.]] to Riga, where they were welcomed by the Chabad community. Greenberg was able to get the message to Dubin to bring the Rebbe to Riga. A month later, the students traveled back to the US.
The bombing continued that Friday morning in Otwock, snuffing out the lives of ten children in the Jewish orphanage.[[17: Der Morgen Journal, March 27, 1940, March 29, 1940, and April 5, 1940, reprinted in Rachel Altein and Rabbi Eliezer Y. Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2002), appendix 4.]] The new yeshivah building was also struck, but there was no loss of life. As night fell, the Jews of Otwock ushered in Shabbat. “The police issued an order prohibiting the lighting of any fire or light,” remembered the Rashag.[[18: Der Morgen Journal, reprinted in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno.]] The Rebbe’s home was blanketed in an “eerie atmosphere. Small Chanukah candles were lit,” providing somber, subdued lighting. “The windows were covered tightly,” so as not to let out any light. They did not have enough gas masks for everyone, “so the Rebbe’s family kept glasses of soda water and cotton to shield against gas.” The Rebbe insisted that the Shabbat meal not be disturbed and celebrated in a traditional manner. During the meal, a siren signaled another air raid. The Rebbe and his family had no choice but to “leave the Shabbat meal and descend into an underground shelter, where we sat for two hours.”
After the conclusion of Shabbat, plans were made to transfer the Rebbe and his family to nearby Warsaw. Before the war, dozens of trains ran daily between Otwock and Warsaw, but “now there was nothing,” says the Rashag. The roads were under bombardment, and travel was dangerous.
From Warsaw they intended to head to Latvia, which still was neutral and could be a base from which to assist in the rescue of others. “My grandfather decided quickly to get to a place where he could organize [efforts] to save Polish Jews,” remembered Berke Gurary, the Rebbe’s grandson.[[19: “Rabbi Barry Gourary’s Life and History | Full Testimony | USC Shoah Foundation,” September 10, 1997, video available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CFnVFTTyT0k.]] On Monday, the Latvian Embassy sent a car with diplomatic plates to transport the Rebbe and his family to Warsaw. “Since it carried license plates of a foreign country, there was no worry of it being stopped,” the Rashag explained. The car made the trip twice: Chaim Lieberman left with some members of the Rebbe’s family on Monday, and the Rebbe followed the next day. The Rebbe took along with him valuable historic manuscripts, leaving the bulk of his library behind in Otwock.
A large crowd gathered to bid the Rebbe farewell. Yosef Wineberg recalled the tearful scene. The Rebbe’s face was etched with sadness, and he cried profusely as he blessed the crowd. “A king guards his subjects. You Jewish children, may G-d guard you where you will be, and us, wherever we will be.”[[20: Rabbi Yosef Wineberg (1918–2012) was a student of the yeshivah in Otwock. From Poland he escaped to Lithuania and then to Shanghai. Later, he was one of the nine students who established the yeshivah in Montreal. He served as the vice chairman of the United Lubavitcher Yeshivah and traveled the world on behalf of the Rebbe. Diary of Rabbi Yosef Wineberg, “With the Lubavitcher Rebbe in Warsaw, under the hail of German bombs,” original Hebrew version published in Refael Nachman Kahan, Shemuot VeSippurim (Brooklyn, NY: 1977), 3:118–20. English translation published in Out of the Inferno, appendix 3.]]
The drive to Warsaw was harrowing. German planes overhead continued to terrorize them, dropping bombs. All along the way there was death and destruction. As the planes attacked, other travelers abandoned their cars, finding shelter along the road. The Rebbe told those with him not to fear. “There is no need to run and hide because Father [the fifth Rebbe, the Rebbe Rashab] is interceding on our behalf.”[[21: Judaism teaches that we can ask the deceased to intercede on high for the welfare of those in this world. See Taanit 16a; Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chaim 579:3, Mishnah Berurah (14) ad loc: “We go to graves so the deceased will invoke mercy on us.” For a broader discussion, see Tzvi Freeman, “Is It OK to Ask a Deceased Tzaddik to Pray for Me?” available at: chabad.org/562222.]]
As the Rebbe’s entourage neared Warsaw, some feared that Jewish neighborhoods were being targeted by the Luftwaffe and thought it might be safer to stay in a non-Jewish area.[[22: Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, appendix 4.]] The Rebbe rejected this, saying he wanted to be with the Jews no matter what the risk. “Our brethren are in the greatest danger, and you want me to separate from them and hide in another neighborhood?” Hundreds of thousands of Jews lived in Warsaw, and the Rebbe was emphatic: “My lot will be with theirs.” The Rebbe was determined to help as many students and Chasidim as possible escape the Nazi onslaught.
The Rebbe moved into an apartment in the heart of Jewish Warsaw owned by Zalman Shmotkin.[[23: Shmotkin was one of the Rebbe’s Chasidim in Poland. The house was located at 32 Muranowska Street. Two apartments were emptied to provide space for the Rebbe and his extended family.]] When they first arrived, says Wineberg, “Nobody in the city knew just how serious the situation was.” A day later, a German bombing raid hit the building across the street.[[24: For a description of the German siege of Warsaw, see: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hohsP-hK1SQ.]] The Rebbe instructed his Chasidim to search the rubble for survivors. Ominous news began to trickle in. “Only on Wednesday did we learn that the Germans were rapidly advancing toward Warsaw.” The Latvian Consulate would be a safer shelter, but officials rejected the Rebbe’s request for refuge. Finally, a few days later they agreed, but by then it became too dangerous to move around the city.
A week later was the eve of Rosh HaShanah.[[25: September 13, 1939 (29 Elul, 5699).]] The Rebbe provided funds to Zalman Shmotkin to ensure that the students of the yeshivah remaining in Warsaw had food. That day, “at five in the afternoon, bombs struck Shmotkin’s building, and it burst into flames.” The Rebbe and his family escaped to the other side of the street, finding shelter in an archway. Wineberg says all the residents of the building were packed together. “Women and children were wailing.” Wineberg and a few other students stood next to the Rebbe, guarding him. “His face was awesomely grave. He sat whispering prayers in an undertone the entire time.”
The German bombing was relentless. “Suddenly, a horrifying scream was heard. A bomb had exploded nearby, and the powerful blast threw the Rebbe and his family from one end of the yard to the other,” says the Rashag.[[26: Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno.]] The blast had filled the air with smoke. Thinking the worst, “they began screaming, ‘Gas!’ The Rebbe’s daughter Chana applied a wet cloth across her father’s mouth, but quickly they discovered that it was only dust.”
With the sun setting soon and Rosh HaShanah about to begin, the Rebbe’s daughter Chana and his sixteen-year-old grandson Berke insisted that the Rebbe move to a safer location. After a tremendous effort, a Jewish wagon driver agreed to take the Rebbe and family[[27: Rabbi Feigin and the Shmotkin brothers worried that the Rebbe’s eighty-year-old mother would be unable to flee on foot if the area was bombed. They moved her on a stretcher to an area where there was no bombing.]] to a nearby medical clinic. It was risky, as he could be arrested for transporting private passengers, but he was still willing to help, saying, “If it befits the Rebbe to be in danger, it befits me too.” Others walked alongside as they made their way to 8 Gegrnitche Street.
That night, the Rebbe prayed without a minyan. His grandson recalls that on Rosh HaShanah, “normally he would spend three to four hours in Maariv,” his prayers filled with tears, but that night it took just a half an hour. “He was totally exhausted and could not stand.” Everyone was worried as the bombs continued to rain down. “The Rebbe was reassuring everyone around him, a remarkable strength of character for a man who could not move for physical reasons.”[[28: Shoah Foundation interview, September 10, 1997.]]
The next day, Jews streamed from around Warsaw to be near the Rebbe. One account sets the number of those gathered at one thousand. It was unlike any other High Holiday. “Services began at the crack of dawn and were not drawn out so that the shofar could be sounded early, before the Germans began their daylight bombing,” says the Rashag. The day after Rosh HaShanah, a bomb fell on the building occupied by the Rebbe. “In one room, half a wall fell down, and all the windowpanes were blown out. Debris sprayed into the room where the Rebbe was sitting and studying Torah.” Fortunately, he was unscathed.
After the bombing, they moved yet again, this time to Nalevki street. That too became the target of German bombing, and the Rebbe crowded into a shelter with hundreds of others. Not only were bombs falling from above, but as German troops drew closer to Warsaw, an artillery bombardment of the city began. During the attacks, says Wineberg, “The Rebbe would sit in the room writing maamarim, and his hand would shake from the bombing. He would tell those around him, ‘I am not afraid.’”
Two days before Yom Kippur,[[29: September 21, 1939 (8 Tishrei, 5700).]] the Rebbe moved back to Shmotkin’s apartment. As the holiday was about to begin, “The Rebbe was unusually grievous,” Wineberg says. A small group prayed with the Rebbe. “As the Rebbe recited maftir Yonah, everyone’s hearts overflowed. There were thunderous explosions. The calmness in the Rebbe’s voice kept everyone from hysteria and flight.” The final service of Yom Kippur was prayed hastily, and the shofar sounded before nightfall, “to ensure everyone could leave before further bombing.” Wineberg stayed with the Rebbe; they broke the fast with a bowl of soup. The Rebbe’s mood had changed, and soon, as Warsaw was being bombarded and everyone was sitting in the corridor, the Rebbe’s daughter Chana started humming a tune from a chasidic melody. “The Rebbe told us to sing that song, and he accompanied the song with his holy hands with a strong motion of elevation. In the background, the deafening sounds of explosions mingled with our singing.”
Four days later,[[30: September 27, 1939 (14 Tishrei, 5700).]] just a few hours before the holiday of Sukkot was about to begin, the Polish army in Warsaw surrendered to the Germans. Still, skirmishes raged around the city. As sunset neared, the Rebbe requested that a sukkah be erected by the building manager. Quite surprised by the request, he asked the Rebbe how he could sit in a sukkah in the middle of a war. The Rebbe replied, “Never once have I missed sitting in the sukkah, and I won’t this year.” Wineberg remembers, “The Rebbe said that we have to do what we have do, and G-d will do what He has to do.” Late that night, a sukkah was erected, and the Rebbe was able to recite the traditional blessings inside it.
They had found refuge in the home of Herschel Gurary, a distant cousin of the Rashag. The family had heard that “the SS was looking for Schneersohn,” recalls Berke Gurary. The apartment was not near the main Jewish area, and the Rebbe stayed there for a few weeks. While chaos reigned outside, the Rebbe was always productive. “He would sit at the dining room table to write maamarim.”[[31: Shoah Foundation interview, September 10, 1997.]]
The Rebbe remained hidden in Warsaw as the Germans extended their reign over the city. On October 5, just over a month after the German invasion began, Hitler arrived in Warsaw. He was welcomed with a military parade as thousands of Nazi soldiers strutted down the main avenues of Poland’s capital.[[32: https://vimeo.com/528071660.]] The Jews had been surprised by the power of the German blitz; they could not have imagined the Holocaust lurking on the horizon. Indeed, the German occupation of Poland in World War I had been benevolent to the Jews. Now, some Polish Jews sought sanctuary in nearby Russia, while others feared the anti-religious Communists more than the Germans. This attitude changed quickly as Germany’s true face of anti-Semitism was quickly exposed.
In Dukla, Pinchas Hirschsprung saw the cruel hand of the Germans revealed right away. Jews were immediately forced into labor battalions and compelled to keep their stores open on Shabbat. On Rosh HaShanah, they feared that sounding the shofar might provoke the Germans. Finally, they blew it, concealed behind the closed doors of the synagogue. By the holiday of Sukkot, just three weeks after the war started, “the town was on edge,” Hirschsprung says. “People were being snatched off the streets and taken to work.” His friend Mendel Shuss had run away from nearby Przemysl. “He barely escaped with his life. In Przemysl six hundred Jews had been slaughtered.”[[33: Rabbi Pinchas Hirschsprung, The Vale of Tears.]] Still, even with the foreboding signs, few would have believed the Nazis’ plans to annihilate every Jew in Europe.
Most of the students of the Lubavitch yeshivah were Polish citizens, so Latvia was not open to them. The Rebbe urged them to leave immediately for Vilnius, which had now been declared the capital of nearby Lithuania. It was still neutral, and the Chabad yeshivah there would provide refuge. Moshe Feder was one of the students looking for refuge. “I had in mind to go to Romania or Hungary,” he says. But he did not want to leave without consulting the Rebbe. “I heard the Rebbe was staying with Herschel Gurary in Warsaw.” The Rebbe told him, “It’s good you came” and instructed him to go to Vilnius. “The Rebbe gave me money and saved my life,” Feder says.[[34: Interview with Moshe Feder, JEM Oral History Project.]]
Yosef Kramer says the war disrupted communication. “Under German occupation there was no way to be in touch with the Rebbe.”[[35: Dovid Zaklikowski, The People’s Rabbi: The Life and Legacy of Rabbi Leib Kramer (Brooklyn, NY: Hasidic Archives, 2021), part 3.]] His friend Yosef Rodal, who had already crossed the border to Lithuania, was able to get a message to him with the Rebbe’s instruction to come immediately. He did, and it was a harrowing journey. Joined by other students from Warsaw, Kramer crossed the frozen Bug River into Soviet-controlled territory, where he was arrested by Russian soldiers in the town of Radum. Local Jews bailed him out, and finally he made his way to nearby Lithuania.
Yosef Goldstein in Chełmiec received a postcard with a coded message written in Polish: “Grandfather is asking that all his grandchildren come.”[[36: Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, chap. 54.]] He understood that the Rebbe was imploring his students to leave Poland. Some students made the trek. Chaim Meir Bukiet got a similar message relayed by his fellow student Menachem Greenglass. The border had been closed, but smugglers helped him cross in the middle of the night. “It was terrifying,” says Bukiet. He was surprised to discover that he was not in Lithuania. “Finally, a local farmer told us we had reached Russian territory.” He made his way to Brisk, where he met up with other students, finally finding a haven in Vilnius.
But many never got the notification. “I sent many letters to the students,” Greenglass recalled. “Chaim Meir Bukiet was an only son. It was difficult for his parents to part with him. Still, he followed the Rebbe’s instructions.”[[37: The Mashpia: The Life and Teachings of Reb Volf Greenglass (Montreal, Canada: Ezras Achim Organization, 2023), chap. 3.]] But many of the yeshivah students did not make the journey to Lithuania. Dispersed throughout Poland and with communication limited, some never received the Rebbe’s instructions or were unable or unwilling to take the risky trip across the border. Others got there too late to cross the border. “Almost all of those who remained in Poland were killed,” Greenglass lamented.
As the Rebbe was dodging bombs in Warsaw, a campaign to save him was gaining steam in the US. Rabbi Jacobson had finally arrived back in New York on September 18. He was told that during the first days of the war, the Chasidim in Riga had been in contact with the Rebbe. Lately, they had heard nothing; the Rebbe’s fate was unclear. Jacobson believed the key to saving the Rebbe was American intervention, but it seemed an impossible feat. Chabad in America was tiny, basically a one-man operation in Brooklyn with Jacobson at the helm. He did not have any political or financial clout, but he had one asset: determination.
Jacobson enlisted Samuel Kramer,[[38: Kramer was a prominent attorney who, while not chasidic in his outward appearance, had a strong family loyalty to Chabad. He was an observant Jew, active in a variety of Jewish causes. He organized annual fundraisers for Chabad at his synagogue, the prominent New York Jewish Center located on Manhattan’s Upper West Side. See Dovid Margolin, “Milton Kramer, 99, a Third-Generation Pillar of Chabad in America,” available at: chabad.org/4124407.]] an attorney and son of the founder of Agudas Chassidei Chabad in the US. Within days, Jacobson and Kramer recruited the help of prominent New York politicians. On the eve of Yom Kippur, New York Senator Robert Wagner wrote to Secretary of State Cordell Hull, telling him that leading New York Jews had contacted him about the Rebbe’s fate. Asking Hull “whether there is some way by which the whereabout of Rabbi Joseph Isaac Schneersohn of Poland might be ascertained.”[[39: Letter from Robert Wagner to Secretary of State Cordel Hull dated September 22, 1939, in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 31.]] Within a few days, Congressman Sol Bloom,[[40: Sol Bloom (1870–1949) was a prominent Jewish congressman from New York. As chair of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, he had an influence on US policy. He supported Roosevelt’s policy toward European Jews, which was against open immigration, putting him at odds with Jewish activists who lobbied for more strident US action.]] chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, replied to Wagner that communication with Poland had been disrupted. “The department will endeavor to advise you when communication with Poland is reestablished.”
Late into his first night back in the US, Jacobson was “sitting and worrying,” wondering what else he could do. “I remembered that the lawyer Asher Rabinowitz had arranged for the Rebbe to meet President Hoover when he visited in 1929.” Despite the late hour, Jacobson called Rabinowitz, telling him, “Come to New York at once.” Asher’s father, Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz, was a prominent Lubavitcher follower in Boston and a confidant of the Rebbe. Asher had extensive Washington connections thanks to his work in the IRS. The next day, Asher and his brother Peretz from Springfield, Massachusetts, met with Jacobson, who told them, “Go to Washington immediately. Don’t leave until you find a way to contact the Rebbe. Let nothing deter you, not even Shabbat or Yom Kippur. Find a way to get the Rebbe out of Poland.”[[41: Di Yiddishe Heim, issue no. 64, Summer 1975.]]
The Rabinowitz brothers took a train to Washington and headed to the Supreme Court to see Justice Brandeis, who had met with the Rebbe twice during his year-long visit a decade earlier. Brandeis enlisted the help of Benjamin V. Cohen, a senior official in the Roosevelt administration. Surprisingly, he would become the key inside man, spurring the government bureaucracy to save the Rebbe. Born to a German immigrant family, Cohen grew up in Muncie, Indiana with a modicum of observance of Jewish holidays. According to his biographer William Lasser, “Cohen more strongly identified as an American than as a Jew.”[[42: Growing up, Cohen “attended services from time to time” and had a “smattering of Hebrew and a passing acquaintance with Jewish holidays.” William Lasser, Benjamin V. Cohen: Architect of the New Deal (The Century Foundation, 2002), chap. 2.]] After he graduated from the University of Chicago, he met Felix Frankfurter, who was appointed to the Supreme Court in 1939, and through him, Judge Julian Mack and Justice Louis Brandeis. After practicing law in New York, Cohen moved to Washington in 1933, where he rose in government ranks. In 1938, Time magazine[[43: Cover available at: https://content.time.com/time/magazine/0,9263,7601380912,00.html.]] featured him on the cover as the architect of the New Deal and a member of Roosevelt’s “Brain Trust.” During the war years, Cohen rebuffed requests from Jewish leaders to lobby Roosevelt to relax restrictions on Jewish immigration or to bomb Auschwitz. But when it came to the Rebbe, despite not having a strong connection to tradition, Cohen used all his influence to ensure the Rebbe’s safety. His uncharacteristic zealousness for the Rebbe may have been due to his close friendship with Brandeis, or perhaps it was based on a feeling that as a Jew, he could make a difference. Lasser says he cared about the Jews in Europe “and wanted to do something – Cohen liked to operate in the background and make things happen.”[[44: Author’s interview with William Lasser.]]
In the US, Jacobson was growing more concerned. Mordechai Dubin in Riga had cabled him, “Every hour is becoming more dangerous.” The next day, Dubin cabled again, proposing that an effort be made to contact the Rebbe “through neutral countries.” Jacobson and Kramer weren’t reaching out only to US government officials for help; they also enlisted the support of the Rebbe’s longtime friend Dr. Joseph Rosen, head of the JDC in Europe. He, in turn, implored the US Ambassador in Riga, via cable, to intervene with Latvian authorities. “I urge you to do your utmost to effect his protection and removal to Riga.”[[45: Cable Sept. 26, 1939. He also shared Shmotkin’s address, 32 Muranowksa, where the Rebbe found refuge during the first days of the bombings. By now, it had been destroyed, and the Rebbe had relocated to a nearby building, but that information had not made its way from Poland to Latvia and then on the US.]]
One Shabbat, as Jacobson was trying to save the Rebbe, ten-year Yisrael Gordon and his father Yochanan stopped by to visit. “Suddenly, the phone started ringing,” Yisrael Gordon recalled years later.[[46: Recollection by Yisrael Gordon to his great-granddaughter Rivkah Levitan. Due to the doubt that a government official was calling, Rabbi Jacobson felt it was a lesser transgression for a minor to break Shabbat. Once it was clear that it was a government official on the phone, and that it was an issue of life and death, Jewish law is clear that Shabbat must be transgressed. It seems fair to assume that if young Gordon were not present, Rabbi Jacobson would have answered the call despite not being sure that it was connected to saving the Rebbe. Jewish law dictates that a Jew must transgress Shabbat even in a case when it is doubtful if a life can be saved.]] “Not everyone had a phone, and it never rang on Shabbat.” Jacobson jumped up and turned to young Yisrael. “Pick up the phone,” he ordered. Yisrael was confused – picking up the phone would be transgressing Shabbat. “I glanced at my father. He shot me a look that said, ‘Do it.’ Instantly, I picked up the phone, and it was exactly what Rabbi Jacobson had thought, a government official calling about the Rebbe.” Once it was clear that it was about saving the Rebbe, Jacobson took the phone.
The Rebbe’s whereabouts were unclear to Chasidim around the world. On the first night of Rosh HaShanah in Tel Aviv, Rabbi Michoel Dvorkin bellowed in an anguished voice as he came to the words of the prayers “The deliverance of the righteous is from the Lord.” His friend Pinchas Althaus explained, “From the beginning of the war, we don’t know where the Rebbe is, and that’s why he is crying out.”[[47: Psalm 34, recited at the beginning of the service on Erev Rosh HaShanah. Rabbi Mordechai Ashkenazi, HaRav Ashkenazi [Hebrew], vol. 2, chap. 1.]] The Israeli paper Haaretz[[48: Haaretz, November 12, 1939.]] reported from London that the Rebbe had perished. Two days later,[[49: Haaretz, November 14, 1939. Two days later, on November 16, Haaretz reported that the Chabad Chasidim in Tel Aviv had received a telegram from Rabbi Chaim Ozer Grodzinski in Vilnius reporting that the Rebbe was alive in Warsaw.]] the paper relayed a dispatch from Vilna that the Rebbe was alive. Apprehension was heightened by the fact that the Rebbe was a high-value target for the Gestapo.
Finding a way to extradite the Rebbe from war-torn Warsaw was a daunting challenge. The Chasidim in the US assessed potential routes of escape, such as heading north to Latvia, or south via Italy and from there to the US. Latvia could be very risky. Russia was in control of half of Poland and was setting its sights on seizing Latvia. If Russia invaded,[[50: Russia had seized Latvia in 1710, only withdrawing in 1920. There was great fear that they would retake Latvia. Those fears were realized when Russia invaded on June 17, 1940, a few months after the Rebbe departed to the US. Latvia regained its independence in 1991 after the fall of the Soviet Union.]] the Rebbe would be at grave risk. Clearly, Latvia could only be a temporary haven. The only true solution was to find a way for the Rebbe and his family to leave Europe entirely and find refuge in the United States.
To prod the wheels of the government forward, Jacobson and Kramer enlisted the support of prominent Washington attorney Max Rhoade.[[51: Max Rhoade (1898–1964) was a graduate of George Washington Law School. An active Zionist, he was one of the founders of Avukah at Harvard in 1924, which developed into a national student Zionist organization. He was national president for four years, later becoming honorary president. See “Avukah, Zionist Student Federation, Concludes Convention in Buffalo,” JTA, July 7, 1926, available at: https://www.jta.org/archive/avukah-zionist-student-federation-concludes-convention-in-buffalo.]] Rhoade was born in Poland in 1898, and his family immigrated to the US in 1901. In 1929, he was appointed the Washington representative of the Zionist Organization of America, developing relationships with many prominent Jewish leaders, including Justice Louis Brandeis and Reform Rabbi Stephen S. Wise. Well-connected in government circles,[[52: Rafael Medoff, Jewish Americans and Political Participation: A Reference Handbook (ABC-CLIO, September 1, 2002), 117.]] Rhoade was a passionate Jew with deep ties to key Jewish leaders. He would be a compelling advocate for the Rebbe’s rescue.
Rhoade faced the challenge of strict US immigration regulations that had been tightened in 1924. But there were exceptions to the quotas, including one that allowed religious ministers to be admitted to the US on special visas if they had a position waiting for them at an American congregation.[[53: Jonathan D. Sarna and Zev Eleff, “The Immigration Clause that Transformed Orthodox Judaism in the United States,” in American Jewish History, vol. 101, no. 3 (July 2017), 357–76.]] Jewish groups successfully used this opening to save European rabbis. Still, the barrier of bias by State Department officials loomed large. Breckinridge Long,[[54: Breckinridge Long (1881–1958) was born to an affluent family in St. Louis and was a lawyer by training. After losing two bids for the Senate, he was appointed Under Secretary of State by his friend FDR. Long attempted to block immigration by Jews fleeing the Holocaust.]] the assistant secretary of state appointed by President Roosevelt in 1939, supervised the issuance of visas in US embassies worldwide, and he used his power to deter Jewish immigration. In June 1940, Long wrote a memo to State Department staff. “We can delay, and effectively stop, for a temporary period of indefinite length, the number of immigrants into the United States.”[[55: A copy of the infamous memo and background information on Long are available at: https://exhibitions.ushmm.org/americans-and-the-holocaust/personal-story/breckinridge-long.]] He suggested that US representatives overseas “put every obstacle in the way” of refugees and “postpone and postpone and postpone the granting of the visas.”
Further complicating Rhoade’s efforts was that Chabad was just a small organization with little political clout. Though there was a network of some 150 Chabad-associated congregations established by immigrants, there were few actual practicing Chabad Chasidim. Most of the congregations’ members were linked by a sentimental connection to Chabad. Agudas Chassidei Chabad led by Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson was established in 1924[[56: Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1988), chap. 4.]] to strengthen the bond between these congregations. It had made some strides forward but had not yet matured into a major national Jewish organization. Jacobson was devoted to the Rebbe, but his managerial talent was marginal and his financial resources were limited.[[57: Jacobson would struggle to find the funds to pay Rhoades’s legal fees.]] But what he lacked in organizational skills he made up for in enthusiasm and passion for the cause. Ultimately, his fiery commitment and willingness to overcome any obstacle would be the keys to saving the Rebbe.
Rhoade began to reach out to his connections, and Jacobson and Kramer kept up the pressure. Congressman Bloom enlisted the support of Democratic kingmaker Postmaster General James Farley. Dr. Joseph Rosen, head of the JDC in Europe, turned to the US Ambassador in Riga, urging him to do the utmost to help the Rebbe escape Warsaw. This coalition of congressmen, senators, key administration officials, and Justice Brandeis, all clamoring for the US to help find the Rebbe’s whereabouts and save him, slowly broke down the wall of indifference that surrounded the State Department.
Benjamin Cohen personally appealed to Robert T. Pell, head of the State Department’s Division of European Affairs. On October 2, Cohen and Pell had an extensive phone conversation strategizing on how to save the Rebbe.[[58: Dept. of State, Memorandum of conversation, October 3, 1939, Subject: Rabbi Schneersohn, Participants: Mr. Benjamin V. Cohen, Mr. Robert T. Pell, European division. Published in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 48.]] Cohen impressed on Pell the Rebbe’s unique value to Jews globally. “He is one of the leading Jewish scholars of the world,” he said. Pell replied that the State Department had received requests from “many prominent Jews” to help the Rebbe. Cohen was a senior White House official, very close to the president, and it seems that it was this call that finally stirred Pell to act.
Cohen told Pell that he was pessimistic about the ability of the Latvians to intervene. Despite being neutral at the time, they did not have the capability to search for the Rebbe in Warsaw. He then proposed a novel idea. He was aware that during the 1938 Evian Conference on the plight of Jewish refugees,[[59: The conference was held in Evian, France, in July 1938. Delegates of thirty-two countries assembled to discuss saving Jewish refugees from Nazi persecution. The Evian Conference resulted in almost no change in the immigration policies of most of the attending nations. The major powers – the United States, Great Britain, and France – opposed unrestricted immigration, making it clear that they intended to take no official action to alleviate the German-Jewish refugee problem.]] Pell had befriended Helmuth Wohlthat, a senior German diplomat. Cohen also knew that Wohlthat had assured Pell that if there was any specific case in which America was particularly interested, he would try to find a solution. In the past, Wohlthat had quietly helped US concerns. Cohen suggested that Pell ask Wohlthat to find a way to save the Rebbe. In 1939, German leaders still expected the war to be over soon and wanted to be in the good graces of the United States, still neutral at the time.
A day after getting the endorsement of Secretary of State Cordell Hull, Pell telegrammed the senior secretary at the US Embassy in Berlin, Raymond Herman Geist,[[60: Raymond Herman Geist (1885–1955) was the first secretary and consul in the US Berlin mission. In that capacity, he was instrumental in helping Jews leave the country. He joined the US consular service in 1919 while he was teaching at Harvard. During his long tenure in Berlin, he cultivated important relationships with German government officials and provided the US administration with an insightful analysis of internal German politics. Geist was well connected in German government circles, even negotiating with Heinrich Himmler, Reinhard Heydrich, and Hermann Goering. In 1938, in the aftermath of Kristallnacht, he warned US government officials that German Jews “were condemned to death.” For more on Geist, see Richard Breitman, The Berlin Mission: The American Who Resisted Nazi Germany from Within (PublicAffairs, 2019). Strangely, the author omits Geist’s important role in saving the Rebbe.]] telling him that he was inundated with requests for help, including from influential members of the administration.[[61: Telegram, Pell to Geist, October 2, 1939, Washington National Records Center.]] He asked Geist to explore the possibility of the German military providing safe passage for the Rebbe to Riga.[[62: In the telegram, Pell noted that the Rebbe was a Latvian citizen. “While the government does not wish to intervene in the case of a citizen of a foreign country, you might in the course of conversation with Wohlthat….” Pell emphasized that this issue needed to be handled with diplomatic sensitivity.]] He instructed Geist to act with discretion, suggesting he contact Wohlthat. “Inform him as from me, in view of our previous relationship, the interests of the country in this particular case.”
Geist was the longest-serving American consular official in Berlin, having arrived there in 1929. Time and again, he bent US visa regulations to benefit German Jews under threat. He had intervened with senior Nazi officials to expedite the emigration of Sigmund Freud and other prominent Jews. Well placed and well connected, Geist would also play an essential part in prevailing on elements in the German government to help save the Rebbe.
Wohlthat had been a soldier in World War I and later joined the Nazi party. He attended Columbia University in 1929–30, earning a degree in economics. By 1939, he was in the senior echelon of the Nazi government, serving as chief economic advisor to Hermann Goering, the second-highest Nazi official in Germany. Pell made a shrewd decision in directing his request to Wohlthat instead of Germany’s foreign minister Joachim von Ribbentrop,[[63: Joachim von Ribbentrop (1893–1946) was the foreign minister of Germany from 1938 to 1945. He played a key role in negotiating the German-Soviet nonaggression pact that made possible the German invasion of Poland in September 1939. He also directed diplomatic efforts to persuade Germany’s Axis partners to deport their Jews to German concentration camps.]] a known anti-Semite. Pell expected Wohlthat to use his discretion and knowledge of the upper levels of Nazi politics to expedite the Rebbe’s evacuation from Warsaw.
Wohlthat agreed to help and turned the rescue over to Admiral Wilhelm Canaris, head of the Abwehr, Germany’s naval intelligence. Goering himself may have very well endorsed Wohlthat’s efforts. German historian Professor Wilfred Meyer says, “I think Goering knew about the rescue operation since Wohlthat was one of his closest associates.”[[64: Film, “The Chabad Rebbe and the German Officer,” Larry Price, director (Israel: Price Communications Inc., 2011), 56 minutes.]] Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson wrote that Goering gave his approval.[[65: Yisrael Jacobson wrote in 1968 that Hermann Goering gave his approval to the plan to save the Rebbe; see Di Yiddishe Heim, issue no. 34, Winter 5728 (1968). Others have argued that Wohlthat did not dare approach Goering, since that could have put the whole mission at risk, even causing the expulsion of US Consul Geist. See Ralf Vogel, Journey to America (Germany: 1977). An excerpt titled “A Part of Ourselves: German Jews in the German Army” is translated in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 160.]] According to Meyer, Goering and Canaris had a mutual interest. “They wanted to prevent the war against Poland from becoming a world war.” Two days after the German invasion of Poland, Britain declared war, but it did not dispatch troops to help the Poles, and Meyer explains that Goering and Canaris wanted to find favor with the US administration. “They hoped that President Roosevelt would arrange talks between the Germans and the British in order to save peace.” Because of this, he says, “they were glad to do the American government a favor by rescuing Rabbi Schneersohn.”
Canaris was a decorated career military officer, having served in World War I on a surface vessel and as a U-boat commander.[[66: Richard Bassett, Hitler’s Spy Chief (New York: Pegasus Books, 2012).]] He was an early supporter of Hitler, thinking he would rebuild the country and its military. He joined the Nazi party in 1933 and in 1935 was appointed head of the Abwehr, which brought him into regular contact with Hitler. But Canaris was becoming disillusioned with Hitler. He confided to Paul Frankenheim, a German Jew he assigned to spy in Palestine, that he was distraught over the atrocities he witnessed in Warsaw.[[67: Michael Bar-Zohar, Hitler’s Jewish Spy (London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 1985), 92.]] Quietly, Canaris helped some Jews escape Germany and employed soldiers of Jewish background on his staff. In 1943, he attempted to negotiate a ceasefire with the allies, meeting in Spain with the heads of US and British intelligence. Later in the war, Canaris was implicated in a plot to kill Hitler. He was hanged on April 9, 1945, just a few weeks before the war’s end.[[68: “The Brutal Execution of Wilhelm Canaris – Hitler’s Spymaster,” available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QVVO7qH-t-s.]]
A military unit in Warsaw was needed to discover the Rebbe’s whereabouts and transfer him to a neutral country. “The only force that would be able to do anything was the military intelligence, since Warsaw was occupied by the German troops,” Meyer says. Canaris recruited Lt. Colonel Ernst Bloch, a World War I veteran who earned two Iron Crosses for valor. Bloch’s daughter Cornelia says her father “was a professional soldier and in the military for most of his life.”[[69: Cornelia Shockweiler in “The Chabad Rebbe and the German Officer.”]] After World War I, he attended Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin, earning a doctorate in economics, and continued to serve in the Wehrmacht. In 1935, Canaris appointed Bloch as head of the Foreign Economic Intelligence Department at the naval intelligence. Bloch’s father was Jewish but, his daughter says, he had little connection with his father’s religious background. The Nuremberg Laws,[[70: These included a ban on citizenship, outlawing non-Jewish employees in a Jewish home, and a ban on marriage between Jews and non-Jews. These laws began the cascade of anti-Semitic laws and policies that degraded Jews in Germany and eventually led to the policy of annihilation.]] instituted in 1935, segregated Jews and limited their rights as German citizens, including banning them from serving in the military, but Bloch dodged the issue because of a special clause that afforded Hitler the discretion to declare a person of mixed Jewish blood an Aryan. In 1939, after Canaris personally interceded with Hitler, he declared Bloch an Aryan.
Bloch headed to Warsaw to find the Rebbe and his family. Joining him for this secret mission were other soldiers of Jewish descent.[[71: There were soldiers of Jewish background who served in the German army. Some only had Jewish fathers; others were very assimilated, their ancestry hidden. Canaris kept some of those with Jewish background on his staff.]] Much of Warsaw had been severely damaged during the bombing. The Chasidim in Latvia could not locate the Rebbe’s whereabouts. Neither could the American Embassy in Warsaw, with whom Pell was in contact.
Bloch witnessed the oppression of Warsaw Jews by the occupying German troops. Some were forced into labor battalions, others subject to beatings or shot with little cause. Jews were required to wear a yellow star, and they were subjected to numerous regulations whose punishment for violation was death. The Jews in Warsaw were living in fear, wondering what would happen next. Adding to the suffering was the shortage of food. Yosef Wineberg was able to secure a few kilos of rice for the Rebbe’s family in hiding. “When I brought the rice, there was such joy,” he said.
Throughout October, Bloch and his soldiers searched the Jewish sections of Warsaw, looking for the Rebbe. They tried asking local Jews if they knew his whereabouts. The Rebbe was well-known, and no doubt this inquiry alarmed those they asked, who could not imagine anything but nefarious intent. Bloch tried visiting Jewish gathering points and asking for the Rebbe, to no avail. Finding the Rebbe in a city of millions, much of it ruined and its residents fearfully secretive, would be difficult.
Bloch and his group continued to scour the city. They were given an address and reported back that it was completely demolished and they were unable to determine if the Rebbe was still alive.News was relayed in a long, convoluted route, from Bloch in Warsaw to his commanders in Berlin, and then to Germany’s embassy in the US. They cabled Pell and other US officials in Washington, who informed Max Rhoade and Chabad representatives. Two days later,[[72: November 11, 1939.]] a second message came from German authorities, who had obtained a new address for the Rebbe. The reports were unclear to Rhoade, who immediately requested that Pell ask Wohlthat to confirm that this address was not the “demolished building” and to notify Sam Kramer.[[73: Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 109.]]
Then some news leaked from Warsaw to Riga that gave hope but heightened the urgency. Rabbi Chaim Lieberman escaped Warsaw, making his way to Riga. He wrote to Rabbi Jacobson, “We have received word of the Rebbe in Poland. The situation is indescribably horrible.”[[74: Lieberman wrote in mid-November, before the Rebbe was found. Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, appendix 2.]] He went on to say that besides the concerns about the Rebbe’s health, they were alarmed about the German atrocities. “We know they are under pressure of real terror, for the Germans are inflicting terrible tortures, particularly on rabbis.” A few days later, Lieberman sent a cable from Riga to the US with news from Warsaw. “Rabbi healthy, situation gross, awfully dangerous. Begs enable immigration,” the message included an address, “Bonifraterska 29.”[[75: Cable from Lieberman in Riga to Jacobson in New York, November 17, 1939, in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 101.]] Asher Rabinowitz telegraphed Justice Brandeis: “Received cable from Latvia advising me that Rabbi Schneersohn can be found at home of Gurary, Bonifraterska 29, Warsaw.” The message was passed from Brandeis to Cohen in the White House, from Cohen to Geist in Berlin, and eventually to Bloch, who was leading the search in Warsaw.
Back in Warsaw, the constant inquiries from German soldiers about the Rebbe’s location became known to the Rebbe’s family. According to the Rashag, at one of the places the Rebbe had once stayed, soldiers challenged the residents to reveal where the Rebbe was. They had answered truthfully that they did not know, at which point they were threatened with death. When the Rashag heard about the incident, he became alarmed, fearing they wanted to harm the Rebbe. The Rebbe was unafraid, declaring, “I have never hidden and I will not hide now, no matter what happens.”
Bloch continued the search for the Rebbe in Warsaw, especially near the address he had been provided. He met an elderly Jew outside one building who claimed that the Rebbe was not there. Chaim Lieberman says that some of residents knew the Rebbe was in fact in the building, but “they feared saying anything because they feared that the soldiers had evil intent.”[[76: Kahan, Shemuot VeSippurim 3:134, reprinted in Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia.]] When the information reached the Rebbe that the Germans were searching for him again, he responded as before, that he had never hid and would not do so now.
Suspecting the Rebbe was in the building, Bloch and his soldiers returned, forcing their way into the apartment. The Rebbe’s grandson Berke, sixteen at the time, later described the pandemonium inside. “They pushed the door open. We were surprised when the Germans marched in. They ordered everyone to stand up, and we thought we were going to be shot.” Through all of this, “the Rebbe was calm and controlled. He was a very strong personality. He always knew what he was doing.” Then, to everyone’s surprise, the soldiers announced that they had come to save them and handed out exit visas and travel papers.[[77: Interview with Barry (Berke) Gurary, Amud Aish Memorial Museum archives.]]
At first the Rebbe did not want to leave Warsaw. As Dr. Nissan Mindel writes, “It was only after he realized that there was nothing more that he could do that the Rebbe finally consented to heed the urgent requests of his many followers in Warsaw and abroad, particularly in the United States, to leave the shattered and charred ruins of the Polish capital and make his way to the United States.” Two days later, on November 27, Pell reported to Rhoade that the German soldiers had found the Rebbe alive and that he was now under the protection of a German staff officer. Rhoade informed Sam Kramer, and the news reached the Chasidim in the United States. They were overjoyed, but they knew the ordeal was far from over.[[78: Letter from Max Rhoade to Sam Kramer, November 27, 1939, following up on a phone conversation earlier that day. Richard Pell had received a cable from the US Embassy in Berlin with the news the Rebbe was safe: “He has been ill and is recovering.” It noted that a German officer “has been assigned to look after him” and said he should be able to travel. Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 113.]]
Despite being under the protection of the special unit of German soldiers, the Rebbe was still in mortal danger in Nazi-controlled Warsaw. The SS could still try to seize the Rebbe if they became aware that he was in German custody. Tensions between the Abwehr and the SS reached up its highest echelons. Heinrich Himmler doubted Canaris’s loyalties and resented his authority. The revelation of this mission could have been used by Himmler as an excuse to undermine Canaris.
The Rebbe and his family required transport to a neutral country. The Rebbe’s Latvian citizenship made it the most obvious destination, but there was a legitimate fear that the Russians could pounce any moment and seize Latvia, putting the Rebbe at serious risk. The US was still not willing to provide refuge for the Rebbe. The visa division of the US State Department, known for its unwillingness to help Jews, had not approved the Rebbe’s immigration to the US. The road to safety was complicated and still very treacherous.
Bloch had to transport the Rebbe and his family to safety. It seemed the best option was to depart from the functioning train station at the edge of Warsaw to Berlin and then on to Riga, though this meant heading west and doubling back east to reach Riga. The whole journey would be incomprehensible to bystanders: German soldiers escorting religious Jews into the heart of anti-Semitic Germany in the midst of the war. It was a risky move.
Back in Washington, Max Rhoade expressed doubts about the intended itinerary.[[79: Ibid.]] He suggested a few other options, south via Italy or directly north to Stockholm. The anxieties about the fate of Latvia were heightened when Russia invaded Finland at the end of November. Rabbi Schneur Zalman Gurary arrived in New York a few days later and shared his assessment with Chabad leaders[[80: These were the most prominent Chabad rabbis in the US, including Rabbis Jacobson, Levitan, Kazanofsky, and Rivkin. See “Memo of Conference, Thursday, November 23, 1939,” in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 110.]] that the Russians were poised to invade “in three or four weeks.” He believed that “it would be extremely dangerous for the Rebbe to go to Riga.” The Rebbe had escaped a Russian death sentence in 1927; if the Communists got hold of him again, it could be disastrous. In the end, it was the Germans on the ground who made the final determination. The Rebbe and his family would go to Riga via Berlin, and from there they could transit to Stockholm.
Just over two weeks after Bloch discovered the Rebbe’s whereabouts, on the last day of Chanukah, December 14, 1939, the convoy departed. Warsaw’s central train station had been bombed during the German attack. According to the Rebbe’s grandson, “Bloch secured a truck and a wagon to take us to a station on the outskirts of the city.” Bloch told the Rebbe that he might have to act disrespectfully to him if they encountered the SS or other German military groups. “The trip was through a military area of German soldiers thirsty for blood,”[[81: Letter from Rabbi Chaim Lieberman, published in Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publications, 2011), 343.]] Chaim Lieberman described. Soldiers could have tried to detain the group of obviously religious Jews at any moment. Lieberman says about Bloch, “There was a Jew[[82: While Lieberman was aware of Bloch’s Jewish background, it seems he did not know that only his father was Jewish. Its seems that Bloch must have shared some information about his family history with the Rebbe or with others in his entourage. This would have calmed those who feared being escorted by a German soldier.]] from the German army with impressive medals on his uniform who traveled with the Rebbe.” German soldiers whose suspicions were raised by the strange sight of Jews with a military escort tried to intervene and stop the Rebbe and his family. “Bloch stood up to them unflinchingly, telling the soldiers, ‘They are my responsibility, and I must escort them to Berlin safely.’” Still, the Rebbe’s appearance was drawing attention. The Rashag recalled,[[83: The Rashag told the story at the farbrengen in honor of 18 Elul, 5706 (September 1946). Unpublished manuscript, Nitzutzei Ohr, the diaries of Rabbi Avraham Weingarten.]] “The soldiers escorting the Rebbe wanted the Rebbe to cover his face so as not to draw additional attention. He refused, declaring, “A Jew should not be embarrassed of his appearance.” At one checkpoint, soldiers aimed their rifles at the Rebbe. Bloch shouted at the officer that he was under the command of Admiral Canaris, and he would have him arrested if he continued to interfere. They were challenged again at the train station, and Bloch defused the confrontation. The train ride took a full day, and finally they arrived in the Berlin, where they were taken to the Jewish Community Center, staying overnight before moving into a hotel for Shabbat.[[84: Igrot Kodesh 15:361, letter from the Rebbe to the Ramash and his daughter describing the trip, dated 9 Tevet, 5700 (December 20, 1939).]]
On Sunday, they boarded the train in Berlin for the five-hundred-mile trip to Riga, this time in first class. The route led them through Lithuania, where Chasidim greeted the Rebbe at the Vilnius train station. In Kovno, the Yiddish paper Dos Vort[[85: Dos Vort was a Labor Zionist Yiddish newspaper published in Kaunas. The article was headlined, “With the Lubavitcher Rebbe on the Train,” December 20, 1939.]] reported that the train station was filled with Chasidim straining to catch a glimpse of the Rebbe. “They began to sing boisterously” as the train pulled into the station. A non-Jewish observer remarked, “The Jewish emperor is arriving.” Some of the Chasidim joined the train, where the celebration continued to the next station, with chasidic tunes and toasts of lechaim. The paper’s correspondent, Eliyahu Vad, remained aboard and managed to interview the Rebbe. “What is the state of the Jewish nation today?” he asked. Finding a silver lining, the Rebbe responded that during this time of tragedy the inner goodness of the Jewish people was shining. “There is a great feeling of camaraderie and caring.” He described his experience in the cellar in Warsaw. “Sitting in a dark cellar, while bombs were flying overhead, we – both young and old – didn’t eat or drink. Still, they did not lose their faith and confidence. They prayed and said Avinu Malkeinu.” The Rebbe explained that the true beauty of the Jewish people could be seen in these circumstances. “Not a physical beauty, but a spiritual one, a deep feeling of unity and common destiny, that all, religious and not religious, sensed the pintele Yid (a Jewish consciousness).”
Shortly afterward, they arrived at the Latvian border. The Rebbe’s grandson describes the mood as they finally escaped the Nazi regime. “We were very quiet,” he said, but inside the emotions were soaring: “We were very, very happy.” At that point, Bloch and his soldiers departed from the train.[[86: Bloch returned to the Abwehr, where he was promoted to the rank of colonel. In 1943, he was appointed as a battalion commander in Russia. In February of 1945, the SS prompted his dismissal from the army, due to his Jewish background. When the Russian army reached the edge of Berlin in April 1945, Bloch returned to the front and lost his life just a few days before the end of the war.]] The Chasidim traveled without an escort for the last one hundred miles from the border to Riga, where a large crowd welcomed the Rebbe.[[87: Sunday, 5 Tevet, 5700 (December 17, 1939).]]
That night, a telegram arrived in New York: “The Rebbe is free.” Yisrael Jacobson ran outside and “did handsprings on the sidewalk, shouting with delight.” He could not contain his joy; there was a huge farbrengen in his house that night. The next day he placed a transatlantic call and spoke to the Rebbe, who thanked him for the unprecedented effort of the Chabad community in the US on his behalf.[[88: Di Yiddishe Heim, issue no. 6.]]
It had been a terrible ordeal. “It is not in the human imagination to describe in words all that transpired in the close to four months,” wrote Yechezkel Feigin to his brother-in-law in the US.[[89: Letter to Rabbi Sholom Posner dated 10 Tevet, 5700 (December 22, 1939).]] “For the first month, we were under terrible strain, and as battles raged in the cities, we were under siege and suffered from hunger. More than once, we had to move to seek safety. All the personal possessions of the Rebbe were destroyed. Only with compassion showered on us from Above and with self-sacrifice were we able to save the precious manuscripts of the Rebbe.” The Rebbe’s fragile health had been gravely impacted as well. Feigin wrote to one of the Chabad leaders in Chicago a few days later, “Because of all that the Rebbe endured, he will need to rest in the sanatorium.”[[90: Letter to Rabbi Moshe Sheyivich of Chicago dated 19 Tevet, 5700 (December 31, 1939).]]
In Riga, the Rebbe and his family waited for US visas. The Atlantic Ocean stood as a moat between freedom in the US and chaos in Europe. The Chasidim in the US were gravely worried, fearing a Russian invasion. It was a race against the clock, and Max Rhoade took the lead in this difficult task. Since the enactment for restrictive immigration laws in 1924, it had become more difficult for European Jews to gain entry into the US. The State Department was full of bureaucrats whose mission seemed to be to put up as many barriers as possible in front of Jews seeking refuge in the US. Immigration quotas remained unfilled due to the obstruction of State Department officials and the unwillingness of President Roosevelt to help Jews in war-torn Europe.
Upon the urging of Benjamin Cohen, Robert Pell had managed to get the US to intervene with the Germans to search for the Rebbe in Warsaw. But as head of the European division, Pell had little influence on the visa process. On November 4, while Bloch’s troops were scouring Warsaw for the Rebbe, Rhoade implored Cohen in the White House to urge Secretary of State Cordell Hull to intervene. “It seems logical if the State Department went out of its way in one phase of this matter, it might just as well complete the job.”[[91: Letter from Rhoade to Cohen, November 4, 1939, in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno.]] Despite the lobbying, things were moving very slowly.
At first, Rhoade tried making use of the immigration exemption for clergy who were invited to lead religious institutions in the United States. That clause required applicants to have an American sponsor with at least five thousand dollars ($100,000 today) as security, so as not to become a public charge. A different congregation would be needed to employ each member of the Rebbe’s entourage. For this, Rhoade needed information from Jacobson on the structure and finances of Chabad in the United States, which was easier said than done. Jacobson operated his ad hoc organization from his synagogue in Brownsville, Brooklyn. It served as a loose confederation of the immigrant synagogues, each its own entity. There simply was no well-structured national organization, but Rhoade needed facts and figures, detailed bookkeeping, and an understanding of the Chabad organization in the United Sates. This resulted in a culture clash between the professional lawyer, well-schooled in business and finance, and the old-world Chasid.
In December, with the Rebbe now in Latvia, the issue took on greater urgency. One of the Chasidim, Judah Gurary, came up with a novel idea. “The Rebbe was the world leader of Chabad, which had been first headquartered in Russia and then Poland,” he wrote to Jacobson. “Now that these centers have been destroyed, we the Chabad Chasidim in America want our leader, together with those who helped him, to come and establish the headquarters in America.” Instead of having to prove that each member of the family was employed by a different synagogue, they argued that the Rebbe and his entourage represented the leadership of one of the most important segments of world Jewry. This also solved another problem: A member of the clergy applying for permission to enter the US was required to show that he had been a religious leader in an existing congregation for the past two years. The Rebbe and his family members, while leaders of Chabad, were not connected to a specific synagogue in Europe. Rhoade framed the issue to government officials: “If the Vatican wished to find refuge in the US, would the US provide them refuge as part of a religious hierarchy?”
Immigration visas were issued in overseas embassies. On Rhoades’s instructions, Jacobson cabled the Chasidim in Riga to immediately meet with the US consul to accelerate the process. He wrote that it was decided to “bring the entire hierarchy to Chabad for reestablishment [of the] world seat,” saying they should inform the consul that “Chief Rabbi Schneersohn is indispensable to American Chabad congregations” and that funds had already been deposited as a guarantee.[[92: Cable from Jacobson to Cheifetz and Lieberman, December 21, 1939, in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 170.]] That same day, Rhoade pressured the State Department again, writing to Pell that the Rebbe and his entourage were in “grave danger by the spread of Russian control over Latvia. They are regarded as counterrevolutionaries by the present Soviet regime.”[[93: Letter from Rhoade to Pell, December 21, 1939, in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 173.]]
Frustrated by the lack of progress with the visa department, Rhoade again turned to Cohen, hand-delivering a letter. “Even Pell, a high department official, is disappointed with the result of his efforts. It is obvious that some special further channel is necessary.”[[94: Letter from Rhoade to Cohen, December 29, 1939, in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 192. The letter was marked “very urgent.”]] Rhoade explained that everything was wrapped up “with a lot of hyper-legalistic red tape, and visas are something over which Pell unfortunately has little jurisdiction.” He desperately asked Cohen to intervene again, saying, “We have now stuck a snag on the very brink of deliverance.” He explained that because of Cohen, they had been able to facilitate the “miraculous evacuation to Riga,” and they now needed his help “to have the job completed.” If the Russians invade,[[95: These fears were not unfounded. The Soviets invaded Latvia on June 16, 1940.]] “Rabbi Schneersohn and the other rabbis of the Chabad hierarchy are subject to execution by Soviet Russia.”
Just after New Year’s, there were signs that the lobbying was having an effect. The visa department finally sent a memo acknowledging the principle that Chabad might be considered a religious hierarchy. “Exemption from quota restrictions is being requested by applicants on that basis as a group.” They assigned an investigator to meet with US Chabad leaders to evaluate their request. A week later, two senior officials of the visa section met Chabad leaders in New York. They received a detailed briefing on the history of Chabad, its structure in the US, its finances, and its network of synagogues.[[96: The meeting took place on January 10, 1940. See Memorandum of Investigation of Agudas Chassidei Chabad, in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, appendix 6.]] In Riga, Chasidim continued to pressure the local consul, and at the same time, other public officials continued to urge the State Department to approve the visas. Just over a month later, on February 13, 1940, the visas were finally issued by the US Consulate in Riga.[[97: “I am happy to advise you a cable has been received from Rabbi Schneersohn to the effect all immigration visas to the United States have been granted to all the rabbis in Riga.” Letter from Samuel Kramer to Henry Butler, February 13, 1940, in Altein and Zaklikovsky, Out of the Inferno, 262.]]
Not included were two of the Rebbe’s daughters and their husbands, Rabbi and Mrs. Mendel and Sheina Horenstein, and Rabbi Mendel and Chaya Mushka Schneerson. Eventually, the Ramash and his wife Chaya Mushka were able to escape Paris after the German occupation, arriving in Vichy, France. From there they made their way to neutral Spain and arrived in the US in March 1941. Tragically, the Horensteins were captured by the Nazis and lost their lives in Treblinka.
Within a few hours of arriving in Riga, the Rebbe composed two letters. The first was addressed to Jews worldwide. “It is indescribable what has happened to the Jews under siege in Poland and in Warsaw.”[[98: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter “To our friends, anash across the world” dated 5 Tevet, 5700 (December 17, 1939).]] He wrote that “many perished with bullets of death, [while other were] burned alive and their homes became their graves when they could not escape” the bombardment. He added that those who were injured “may carry those wounds for life.” The economy was also devastated. “All sources of income have been disrupted. Most businessmen, and even the affluent, are now poverty-stricken.” The Rebbe urged Jews around the world, “Irrespective of political party or personal philosophy, raise funds for Polish Jewry and transfer the funds to the JDC.” The second letter was addressed to the global Chabad community. The Rebbe described the conditions of the Chabad community in Warsaw as “terrifying and shocking.”[[99: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter “To our Jewish brethren” dated 5 Tevet, 5700 (December 17, 1939).]] He requested that Chabad Chasidim around the world extend help to their brethren in Poland, describing it as a situation of “saving lives and redeeming captives” and asking for support to help save Chasidim under Nazi rule.
The Rebbe wrote to the JDC leaders directly asking them to ameliorate the suffering of Polish Jewry. He repeatedly wrote to Morris Troper, head of the JDC European office in Paris. “Having witnessed the cruelties and horrors of the war and its aftermath, I feel it is my scared duty to give you firsthand information.” He lauded the JDC as “the only Jewish institution in Warsaw now working in aid of our unfortunate brethren there.” He urged the JDC to mount a “vast campaign to relieve the dreadful distress” in Poland. In the Rebbe’s view, the JDC needed to help Jews escape Poland. He implored the organization “to include in its relief work a provision for emigration,” asking the JDC to facilitate emigration “to Palestine or elsewhere.” He asked that the JDC first focus on the “most urgent cases,” saying the next stage should be “the wholesale immigration of Polish Jewry to a quiet place under the sun, where they can live a normal Jewish life.”[[100: Letters to Morris C. Troper, Chairman European Executive Council, American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, Paris, dated January 10, 1940 and January 13, 1940. Mindel Archives.]]
While the Rebbe urged Jews around the world to work together to help the Jews in Poland through the JDC, he also felt a great sense of personal responsibility to save the lives of his Chasidim and the students of his yeshivas. The efficacy of this two-track approach became clear in late February when Chabad leaders in New York met with leaders of the JDC.[[101: The JDC representative, Dr. Schwartz, explained “the United States immigration regulations which prohibit any organization or corporation from furnishing funds for assisting immigration to this country.” Nor was the JDC willing to cover the costs incurred by relocating the yeshivah to Vilnius. It did agree to provide a grant to the Rebbe to use at his discretion, “in view of Rabbi Schneersohn’s leadership and his contribution to Polish Jewry.” In addition, “in view of the imminent approach of the Passover holidays, it was urged that a prompt decision be made with respect to a sum required for matzos for Russian rabbis.” JDC memorandum, meeting with representatives of Agudas Chassidei Chabad and JDC, February 27, 1940. JDC Archives.]] They offered limited funds but would not provide any financial subsidies to Jews immigrating to the US, citing US law. Nor would they assist the yeshivah in Vilnius. The Rebbe would have to rely on his own resources to aid Chasidim still suffering in Poland, help them escape Nazi rule, and sustain the yeshivah in Vilnius.
Within a few days of arriving in Riga, the Rebbe began working on saving the students of the yeshivah in Vilnius, telegramming Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson to find an avenue of rescue for the students. The Rebbe followed up with letters to Jacobson and the Kramer family, as well as other prominent rabbis such as Dr. Leo Jung, asking for help in arranging visas and financing to transport the students. “The students are in grave danger,” he told Jung. Similarly, the Rebbe urged Jacobson “to work as fast as possible “to arrange transport to safety for the students.”[[102: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letters to Jacobson, the Kramer family, and Dr. Jung dated 14 Tevet, 5700 (December 26, 1939).]]
The Rebbe was also concerned about the fate of his precious library. The most valuable manuscripts had stayed at his side during the siege in Warsaw, but the bulk of the collection was still in Poland. Feigin asked Jacobson to arrange the transfer of the library that remained in Otwock. “There are 127 cases of books and three cases of handwritten manuscripts,” he wrote. These were priceless treasures from great chasidic masters and rabbinic scholars. Feigin pressed Jacobson to intervene with the US officials to see “if the US consul in Warsaw will take them under his control.”[[103: Letter to Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson dated 21 Tevet, 5700 (January 2, 1940).]] This library was a national Jewish treasure, and the Rebbe felt a great responsibility to preserve this historic legacy.[[104: During the Holocaust, there were other heroic efforts to preserve great Jewish libraries and artifacts, most notably the collection of the YIVO Institute in Vilnius. Its staff and others, known as “The Paper Brigade,” risked their lives during the war to hide the collection. After the war, it was discovered and transferred to the YIVO Institute in New York. See “The Paper Brigade: Smuggling Rare Books and Documents in Nazi-Occupied Vilna,” available at: https://www.yivo.org/The-Paper-Brigade. A similar case was the Aleppo Codex, a tenth-century handwritten copy of the Torah used by Maimonides and brought to Syria by his son. Through the centuries it was held in trust by the Aleppo Jewish community. The community was endangered in 1948 after riots broke out in Syria to protest the establishment of the State of Israel. The Israeli government made major efforts to save the Codex, but some of it was lost. Today it is in the National Library of Israel. See Matti Friedman, The Aleppo Codex: A True Story of Obsession, Faith, and the Pursuit of an Ancient Bible (Algonquin Books, 2012).]] Jacobson’s efforts were partially successful, as a portion of the collection did reach the US embassy in Warsaw and eventually the United States in June of 1941.[[105: A Chassidisher Derher, issue no. 17, available at: https://derher.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/adar25774.pdf.]]
The Rebbe spent ten weeks in Riga waiting for the issuance of the visas. The ordeal in Warsaw had impacted his fragile health, and he rested in a nearby sanatorium. While in Riga, the Rebbe made repeated attempts to secure visas for Rabbi Yechezkel Feigin and other Chasidim. He also wrote to leaders in Eretz Yisrael asking them to expedite certificates that would permit immigration there. At this point, there was no way for the students in the yeshivah in Vilnius to gain visas to the US. In the coming months, when a route to survival opened up via the Far East, the Rebbe strongly encouraged his students to seize that opportunity, and he provided vital funding for their travel.
In Riga, the Rebbe fell and broke his hand.[[106: Friday, 6 Shevat, 5700 (January 26, 1940).]] “For three weeks I had a cast, and then in the fourth week a regular bandage,” he wrote to his daughter in Paris.[[107: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 15, letter dated 25 Adar Alef, 5700 (March 5, 1940).]] The injury was difficult for the Rebbe. “I was unable to write until a few days before our departure.” The Rebbe’s mother, Rebbetzin Shterna Sara, also faced a health challenge during those weeks in Riga. Because of a stomach ailment, “she had a twelve-hour operation. Everything went well. She is moving around and healing.” The Rebbe told Yehoshua Wolosow, who also was headed to the US, “I can’t travel now, because the rebbetzin [referring to his mother] is recovering.”[[108: Interview with Yehoshua Wolosow’s grandson, Rabbi Mordechai Einbinder. Wolosow arrived in New York before the Rebbe.]]
From Riga, the Rebbe was in contact with Jews throughout the world. He wrote a series of letters to thank those who had helped save him and his family, and he wrote other letters about a host of communal issues. He was also in communication with the students of the yeshivah in Lithuania and the US. He expressed a strong interest in the educational programs for women in both Latvia and the US, sending letters and meeting members of Achos Hatemimim, the young women’s organization he had established ten years earlier, encouraging them to progress in their studies.
During the interlude in Riga, the Rebbe had an opportunity to hold yechidut, private meetings, with many Chasidim, some of whom even traveled from Lithuania to see him. One of those was Shraga Feivel Zisman and his son Leibel, who came from Kovno. “Hundreds were milling around and waiting to see the Rebbe,” Leibel recalls. The Zismans were finally admitted at 2:00 a.m. “My father told me that one never sat in front of the Rebbe.” Shraga Feivel exchanged a few words with the Rebbe and then asked him to bless Leibel. “At that moment, the Rebbe looked at me. He had a powerful stare, his eyes boring into a person as if seeing the core of his soul. I felt his eyes going through me. I was scared.” The Rebbe remained silent. Leibel heard his father ask a second time, “Rebbe, bless my child, bless my child,” starting to cry. “It seemed like time stopped still, my father sobbing, me shaking, and the Rebbe staring with x-ray eyes. But then finally, the Rebbe pronounced his blessing.” Leibel always wondered why the Rebbe hesitated. He and his brother Berel, who had received a blessing from the Rebbe on an earlier occasion, were the only family members to survive the Holocaust. Leibel was sent to Auschwitz and immigrated to the US after the war.[[109: Leibel Zisman, I Believe: The Story of One Jewish Life (Brooklyn, NY: GJCF, 2012), 56.]]
The Rebbe had been contemplating a move to the United States for years, but as he had confided to Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson on the eve of the war, he wanted to focus inward.[[110: Ibid Zikoron Bes Yisrael.]] “Before I left for America, my spirit was anguished, exhausted by forty-five years of difficult public service, my body shattered by life-threatening experiences,” he said a few years after his arrival. “I had a yearning to find myself in a tent of Torah and derive tranquil pleasure from the sounds of Torah study.”[[111: Uri Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, 5705 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2014), 134.]] But after witnessing the destruction in Poland, the Rebbe keenly felt a new sense of purpose in moving to the US.
He shared these feelings at a farewell gathering the Saturday evening before his departure. It was a deeply emotional evening, the room filled with “elder Chasidim.” Some of them had been followers of the Rebbe’s father and grandfather. One had even met his great-grandfather, the third Rebbe, seventy-four years earlier. The Rebbe told them that the move was a divine mission and not of his own making. “I am not going because I want to go, but because I am being compelled to go.” Ever since he had assumed the position of Rebbe in 1920, he had been forced to keep relocating. “I was compelled to move from Rostov to St. Petersburg,[[112: In May 1924, due to threats from the Yevesektzia, the Rebbe was forced to leave Riga for St. Petersburg. In October 1927, he was forced out of Russia due to the threat to his life. In August 1933, he relocated to Warsaw to be near the yeshivah and strengthen chasidic life in Poland. Due to health concerns, he relocated to Otwock in 1934.]] and I relocated to Riga not because I desired it but rather because I was compelled. I went from Riga to Warsaw because it was required. Similarly, from Warsaw to Otwock, and from Otwock to Riga, and now the trip to America. I am going because I am compelled to do so.” The Rebbe was going to have to start again in the new world. “Sensing my anguish about what I was undergoing, they said, ‘We are sure that it is not you who is traveling to America, but G-d who is leading you there, whether you desire it or not. G-d is leading you to do arduous work, and He will richly bless you with success. You carry the spiritual merits of your holy forbearers, the Rebbes that preceded you.’” Instead of seeing the US as a sanctuary where he could step back from communal concerns, the Rebbe believed that the move to America was for a vital purpose. “The ultimate mission of a soul down here is to do a fellow Jew a favor materially and spiritually.”[[113: Uri Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, 5696–5700, p. 408.]]
On March 4, thousands gathered for a large sendoff. A local paper reported, “The Jewish community of Riga bid farewell to the Lubavitcher Rebbe. The Rebbe blessed the Jewish community, and he blessed the Latvian government and its president before departing.”[[114: Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, 345.]] Leibel Zisman recalls the emotional parting. “Everyone was crying, fearful they would never see the Rebbe again. It was very chaotic.” Many people begged the Rebbe to stay. When it was time to leave, “an ambulance pulled up to take the rebbetzin [the Rebbe’s mother] on a stretcher.” Zisman’s father organized a human chain to hold back the massive crowds to allow the departure of the Rebbe’s family.[[115: Zisman, I Believe, 56.]]
Parting from the Chasidim in Europe was heartrending for the Rebbe. Earlier in the day, the Rebbe sent an encyclical letter to all Chabad Chasidim in Europe and Eretz Yisrael. “The love and bond are not divided by barriers and the borders of countries. We are together with an intrinsic love.”[[116: Igrot Kodesh 5:34, letter to “My dear friends, anash in the Holy Land and Europe” dated 24 Adar Alef, 5700 (March 4, 1940). In the letter, the Rebbe showers them with blessings and encourages them to continue their commitment to Torah study and Jewish observance. It is important to note that at this time, in early 1940, no one imagined the nefarious intent of the Nazis to annihilate the Jewish people. Many thought that Jews under their regime would face difficulties, but the notion that millions would be killed was beyond comprehension.]] At the airport before takeoff, it was impossible to address the large crowds. The Rebbe asked Rabbi Mordechai Cheifetz to share a message: “Tell the Jewish community that the great ocean is not a barrier but a connector. It binds together those on one side of the globe and those on the other. Tell them I am with all of you as one, and you are one with me.”
The Rebbe boarded the plane with his entourage of eleven family members and assistants.[[117: The eleven were the Rebbe, his wife, his mother, the Rashag, the Rashag’s wife, and the Rashag’s son Berel, joined by Rabbi Hodakov and his wife, the Rebbe’s secretaries, Rabbis Nissan Mindel and Chaim Lieberman, and the Rebbe’s nurse Manya.]] The Rebbe discovered that there were an additional seven empty seats. He refused to depart, exclaiming, “I cannot leave, I need to save others.”[[118: “Historic Treasures Rabbi S.B. Schapiro,” #146, video available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MfGfuUCNpvw&t=17s.]] The flight was held up until the seats were filled. They flew the 275 miles to Stockholm, where Rabbi Yisrael Zuber welcomed the Rebbe. The group traveled by train to the port of Gothenburg, where three days after leaving Riga, on March 7, they boarded the SS Drottningholm.
The ship filled with refugees was the only ocean liner still operating between neutral Sweden and the US. Ahead lay a treacherous trip across the Atlantic, crossing the path of warships of Britain and Germany. On the side of the ship, “Sverige” (Sweden) was painted in large letters. Due to mechanical problems, it was held up for a night at the port of Bergen, Norway. The passengers were not aware that German submarines patrolled underneath, preparing for the invasion of Denmark that would occur a month later. Once the ship broke free from the North Sea, it headed across the wide expanse of the Atlantic. Twice, Germans submarines stopped them and sailors boarded the ship searching for military supplies. The sight of Germans created a wave of anxiety, particularly for the Jews on board. The Rebbe’s grandson says that for him, this was the most terrifying moment of the whole experience.[[119: Interview with Barry (Berke) Gurary, Amud Aish Memorial Museum archives.]] “There was a conversation with the Germans, after which they let us through.” And it wasn’t just the Germans. British warships also stopped the ship three times. Each time, they were allowed to proceed.[[120: “America Is No Different: A Selection of Vintage Film Clips of Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak of Lubavitch in the United States,” JEM, chap. 4; Sefer HaSichos, 5700 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot, 2015), appendix A: “The Voyage to America.”]]
The twenty years since the Rebbe had assumed his position in 1920 were tumultuous. He faced a death sentence at the hands of the anti-religious Soviet regime, rebuilt Chabad in Riga and Poland while sustaining the underground religious network in Russia, and escaped the Nazis. But his independent leadership and activism would not stop there. Ahead lay America, a country where Jews were redefining their religion. In their minds, America was different, and Judaism could be recreated in a new American style. Inspired by the concepts of personal empowerment and American individualism, Jews were abandoning religious observance. The immigrant generation rooted in tradition was aging, and they watched their children head down the path to assimilation.
As the ship crossed the Atlantic, the Rebbe was preparing to launch a major initiative to transform US Jewry. He was undaunted by the exhaustion he felt from years of community service, physical ailments, and a lack of financial resources. Unlike in Russia or Poland, there were few actual Chabad Chasidim in the US who would stand by his side, as chasidic life had little American history or roots. In the US, the Rebbe would start from scratch, rebuilding Chabad yet again. He would transcend his own milieu, undertaking a greater vision, and alter the trajectory of American Jewry.

