In Riga, the Rebbe was faced with two dilemmas: one, how to alleviate the suffering of Russian Jews, and two – this one much more personal and deeply spiritual – how to travel to the graves of the righteous to pray there. The solution to both would involve a long journey to the United States with an interlude in Eretz Yisrael. As the oppression in Russia reached new heights, the primary American Jewish aid organization, the JDC, had suspended almost all its funding of the Rebbe’s work in Russia and instead partnered with the Communist regime in resettling Jews in communal farms. The Rebbe had hoped that he could sway senior officials of the JDC in Berlin, but his efforts had been fruitless. He realized the real decision makers were in New York. “The disheartening news regarding the [JDC] budget compels me to travel successfully to the US to set up support for our brothers in Russia on a firm foundation.” The Rebbe wrote to Yehuda Lokshin, Chabad’s director in New York,[[1: Lokshin was the director of Agudas Chassidei Chabad in New York. Before immigrating to the US, he had studied in the yeshivah in Lubavitch. This letter (Igrot Kodesh, vol. 16, dated 20 Shevat, 5689/January 31, 1929) was the first indication of the Rebbe’s plans to visit the US. The chasidic community was informed a few months later.]] telling him that the financial crisis is “causing me great anguish. Hashem should bestow His mercy on me; I am very dismayed and downhearted. I have consulted with HaGaon Rabbi Chaim Ozer and HaGaon HaTzaddik the Chafetz Chaim, who encouraged me to go.”[[2: The Rebbe corresponded regularly with Rabbi Chaim Ozer, who apparently discussed the issue with him while visiting the Chafetz Chaim in Radin (Igrot Kodesh, vol. 16, letter dated 4 Cheshvan, 5689/October 18, 1928). The Rebbe detailed his efforts to secure funding from the JDC in a letter to Rabbi Aharon Milovski (Igrot Kodesh, vol. 16, dated 4 Tishrei, 5769/September 18, 1928).]] The Rebbe hoped that by meeting JDC leaders in the US he could convince them to support his efforts in Russia. The Rebbe also wanted to galvanize the general Jewish community in the US to help their brethren in Russia. There had been some financial help from US Jews, but despite pleas from the Rebbe to prominent rabbis to push their communities to give more, little money was raised. Clearly, the only way to create a solid financial base was for the Rebbe to come to the US himself and appeal directly to Jewish leaders and the public. “It is essential that the Rebbe himself travel to the United States,” wrote Rabbi Feigin to his friend Yisrael Jacobson in New York.[[3: Letter to Jacobson dated 26 Shevat, 5689 (February 6, 1929). In the letter, Feigin tells Jacobson about the financial difficulties and health challenges that the Rebbe is facing. He asks Jacobson to make an effort to unite the Chabad community in the United States to prepare for the visit: “Leave behind the differences of opinion between you [and] make an effort to come together.”]] The trip would also serve another important purpose: The Rebbe would dedicate much time to strengthening religious life in the United States and reconnecting with Chabad Chasidim there. It would also set the stage for his relocation to the US in 1940. The Rebbe’s purpose for visiting Eretz Yisrael was very different.[[4: The Rebbe Rayatz was the only Lubavitcher Rebbe to actually visit Eretz Yisrael. He considered a second visit in 1935 to pray at the graves of the righteous, but that plan did not come to fruition.]] Jewish tradition encourages visiting kivrei tzaddikim, the graves of the righteous, to seek divine blessing, especially in preparation for the High Holidays. This had been a centerpiece of the spiritual avodah of Lubavitcher Rebbes for generations. Traditionally, they prayed for the welfare of the Jewish community at the graves of their predecessors, placing letters and prayer requests there. Prior to resolving to leave Russia, the Rebbe visited Rostov to pray at the gravesite of his father, only then making the fateful decision.[[5: Throughout his leadership, the seventh Rebbe continued the tradition of previous Lubavitcher Rebbes and visited the grave of the Rebbe Rayatz on a regular basis, standing for three or four hours on average in the summer heat and winter cold to read prayer requests from people all over the world. He fasted on the days he went to his father’s grave, and he also visited the mikveh before going to the cemetery. He often responded to requests for blessings with the assurance that “I will mention this at the tzion (grave) of the Rebbe.” This was his way of invoking spiritual blessing.]] In Riga this was impossible. “At this time, I am unable to travel to our country to visit the graves of my ancestors,”[[6: “While I lived in the land of my birth, I would visit from time to time the graves of our righteous fathers, the righteous [spiritual] fathers and rabbis, and invoke mercy on ourselves, for our students, the community of anash in the midst of all of the Jewish people. At this time, it is impossible to travel to the land of my birth, and I have decided to visit the Holy Land, with G-d’s help, to visit the sacred sites.” Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Rabbi Shimon Glizenstein dated 1 Tamuz, 5689 ( July 8, 1929).]] who were all interred in Russia. “I want to travel to the Holy Land to visit the holy places.” The Rebbe planned to pray at the Western Wall in Jerusalem, at the Tomb of the Patriarchs (Me’arat HaMakhpelah) in Hebron, and at the graves of the great Sages. In 1929–30, the Rebbe undertook a long overseas voyage, first to Eretz Yisrael (then British Mandate Palestine[[7: In 1929, the Land of Isael was part of the Palestinian Mandate, ruled by the British government. In World War I, the British had liberated it from the hands of the Ottoman Empire that controlled it for some five centuries. In 1948, it became formally known as the State of Israel after its declaration of independence. The seventh Rebbe asserted that that the historical name, Eretz Yisrael, would be more appropriate. Igrot Kodesh – Lubavitcher Rebbe, vol. 25, letter to President Zalman Shazar dated 12 Tamuz, 5739 ( June 28, 1969).]]) and then to the US. The trip came a few months after recovering from a heart attack[[8: Dovid Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh (The Travels of the Rebbe in the Holy Land) [Hebrew] (Kfar Chabad, Israel: Sifriat Ashel, 1999), 19.]] and lasted just over a year. The first stop was Eretz Yisrael, where the Rebbe had to navigate a complicated political terrain. The influx of secular idealistic Zionist immigrants had prompted conflict between them and the traditional Orthodox community. Some advocated partnering with the Zionists and attempting to mitigate their secular nationalism, while others stood staunchly against them. The Rebbe did not want to be drawn into the debate. When he decided to visit Eretz Yisrael, he turned to the country’s two most prominent rabbinic leaders, who represented the two sides of the dispute: Rabbi Yosef Chaim Sonnenfeld,[[9: Rabbi Yosef Chaim Sonnenfeld (1848–1932) was a student of the Ktav Sofer, Rabbi Binyamin Sofer of Pressburg (now Bratislava), Slovakia. He immigrated to Eretz Yisrael in 1873 and worked closely with Rabbi Yehuda Leib Diskind, the rabbi of the Ashkenazi community. Upon Rabbi Diskind’s passing in 1898, Rabbi Sonnenfeld became the head of the Ashkenazi community. In 1921, he formalized the Eidah HaChareidis, the traditional Orthodox Chareidi community that exists to this day. Rabbi Sonnenfeld was a strong opponent of the efforts to secularize the Jewish community in Jerusalem led primarily by Zionist immigrants.]] leader of the Eidah HaChareidit, the traditional Orthodox community in Jerusalem, and Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak (HaKohen} Kook,[[10: Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak Kook (1865–1935) was born in Russia. His father was a student of the Volozhin yeshivah, and his mother came from a Chabad family. In 1904, he moved to Eretz Yisrael and became the rabbi of Jaffa. In 1929, with the establishment of the Chief Rabbinate, he assumed the position of chief rabbi. Kook strongly supported the Zionist efforts. He was renowned for his scholarship, his concern for all, and his efforts to create bridges between Jews of all backgrounds.]] who was appointed the first chief rabbi by the British Mandate. Rabbi Sonnenfeld argued for opposition to the Zionists and Rabbi Kook for rapprochement, but despite their disagreements, the two respected each other. The Rebbe asked them both to help him with visa arrangements, and he emphasized that the purpose of his trip was personal, “to visit the holy sites.”[[11: Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh, chap. 2; Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Rabbi Yosef Chaim Sonnenfeld dated 2 Tamuz, 5689 ( July 10, 1928).]] Once the travel plans were finalized, the Rebbe wrote to Chabad leaders in Eretz Yisrael[[12: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letters to Rabbi Schneur Zalman Slonim and Rabbi Shlomo Eliazrov dated 3 Tamuz, 5689 ( July 11, 1928).]] informing them of his plans. “I hope that the Chasidim won’t overburden me during the visit, due to my delicate health situation. Every possible effort will definitely be made not to mix into any political issues or political parties, etc., because my visit is of a private nature.” It was a taxing journey for the Rebbe, leaving behind his wife, family, and Chasidim in Europe. Throughout the trip, the Rebbe wrote to his wife almost daily, sharing with her the details of his travels.[[13: Much of the Rebbe’s correspondence with his wife, who was living in Riga during the Rebbe’s US visit, was seized by Russian forces after their takeover of Latvia in 1940. Eventually the letters were transferred to the Russian National Library. A selection of the letters (written primarily in Yiddish) was made available to this author.]] After visiting the Jewish homeland, he continued to the US via Europe, with a stop in Berlin. Upon returning to Europe, weak and exhausted, his doctors recommended that he rest from the journey. After a visit to the spa town of Marienbad to regain his energy, plus another stop in Berlin, the Rebbe finally headed home just over a year after he left. When the Rebbe departed Riga for his journey,[[14: They departed on Tuesday, July 30, 1929 (23 Tamuz, 5689). Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh, chap. 4.]] he was accompanied by his son-in-law the Rashag. In Berlin, his daughter Chaya Mushka and her husband, the Ramash, joined them. Together they traveled by train though Germany, Czechoslovakia, and Austria until they arrived at the port of Trieste in Italy, where they boarded[[15: They boarded the ship on Friday, August 2, 1929 (25 Tamuz, 5689).]] a ship heading south to Alexandria, Egypt. When the boat stopped at the southern Italian port of Brindisi,[[16: The ship stopped at the port on Sunday, August 4, 1929 (27 Tamuz, 5689).]] the Ramash and his wife departed, returning to Berlin, while the Rashag continued, accompanying the Rebbe. In Alexandria, the Rebbe was welcomed by local Jewish community leaders. A delegation of Chabad rabbis from Jerusalem came to escort the Rebbe on the last leg of his journey by train through the Sinai Desert. At the border crossing he was greeted by British officials. As the train crossed southern Eretz Yisrael, Chasidim boarded at each stop, creating a festive atmosphere. The nine-day trek from Riga ended Thursday morning, August 8, with a rousing welcome from an enthusiastic crowd of five thousand – more than ten percent of Jerusalem’s Jewish population – at the train station.[[17: According to the British Census of 1922, there were 39,971 Jews living in Jerusalem. By the census of 1931, that number had reached 51,200. The 1922 census is available at: https://archive.org/details/PalestineCensus1922/page/n15/mode/2up.]] The New York Yiddish daily Der Tag reported, “The platform was filled with a crowd to no end. The British police created an open space for the Rebbe to walk. Outside the station the street overflowed with people.”[[18: Cited in Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh, 68.]] Haaretz reported that when the Rebbe departed from the train, “A large crowd saluted him with applause, and it continued as he made his way through the plaza outside the station.”[[19: Haaretz, August 9, 1929, cited in Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh, 67.]] Since its founding, Chabad had fostered a connection to the ancient Jewish homeland. In 1777, Rabbi Menachem Mendel of Vitebsk led the first chasidic aliyah and founded settlements in Tiberias and Safed.[[20: Challenge: An Encounter with Lubavitch-Chabad in Israel (London: Lubavitch Foundation, 1973), chap. 1.]] His protege, Chabad founder Rabbi Schneur Zalman, escorted him on his journey until Mogilev-Podolski in southern Ukraine. He considered continuing on to Eretz Yisrael, but his mentor instructed him to remain in Europe and focus on spreading chasidic teachings. The chasidic community in the Holy Land remained close to his heart, and to ensure its continuity, Rabbi Schneur Zalman established the international fund Colel Chabad in 1788.[[21: The fund was formally named Colel Chabad in 1817. Today, Colel Chabad remains the oldest organized charity in Israel, with a budget of over $140,000,000 a year. Colel Chabad is the largest provider of food security in Israel and partners with the government in that arena. It runs soup kitchens, wedding halls for indigent families, health clinics, and a wide variety of social service projects in locations throughout Israel. For more, see colelchabad.org.]] He raised money in Europe to distribute to families who settled in the Holy Land. Successive Chabad Rebbes encouraged world Jewry to support the growing community in Israel through Colel Chabad. The 1808 immigration to Safed and Tiberias by students of the Vilna Gaon,[[22: Rabbi Eliyahu of Vilna (1720–97), known as the Vilna Gaon (great scholar of Vilna), was one of the most influential Jewish scholars of the eighteenth century. He opposed the chasidic movement, issuing a cherem, a ban of excommunication, in 1777 and again in 1781. After his passing, his students orchestrated accusations against Rabbi Schneur Zalman that prompted his imprisonment by the czar.]] opponents of the chasidic movement, brought the divisions of European Jewry to Eretz Yisrael. Disagreements also arose within the chasidic community in Eretz Yisrael between Rabbi Avraham Karlisker, the successor of Rabbi Menachem Mendel, and Chabad community members.[[23: Rabbi Menachem Mendel passed away in 1788. His successor, Rabbi Avraham Karlinsker, also a student of Rabbi Dovber the Maggid, differed with the Chabad founder on a variety of issues. See Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeEretz HaKodesh (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot, 1988), chap. 1–5.]] This prompted Rabbi Schneur Zalman’s son and successor, Rabbi Dov Ber, to encourage his Chasidim to relocate to Hebron, where they established a synagogue in 1823 that still stands today.[[24: “The History of Chabad in Hebron,” available at: http://en.hebron.org.il/history/996.]] In the decades that followed, the Hebron community grew, bolstered by more immigrants, including the daughter and son-in-law of Rabbi Dov Ber, Rabbi Yaakov and Rebbetzin Menucha Rochel Slonim, who arrived in 1844. An additional community of Chabad Chasidim was established in Jerusalem, led by Rabbi Eliyahu Yosef Rivlin;[[25: Rabbi Rivlin’s father was a Chasid of the Alter Rebbe. In 1847 he settled in Jerusalem and became rabbi of the Chasidim there. His great-great-grandson is former Israeli president Reuven Rivlin. See “Israel’s President Rivlin Makes a Wish,” available at: www.lubavitch.com/israels-president-rivlin-makes-a-wish/.]] a synagogue was founded in the Jewish Quarter of the Old City in 1848.[[26: Land was purchased in 1850, and a building was erected with help from Sir Moses Montefiore. It is known as the Tzemach Tzedek Shul, named after the third Chabad Rebbe. A second story was added in 1879, and the plaque dedicated by the Sassoon family of Mumbai remains prominently displayed till today. This was the only synagogue in the historic Jewish Quarter of ancient Jerusalem that was not destroyed by the Jordanian occupation between 1948 and 1967. After the Six-Day War in 1967, the first Jew to return to live within the walls of the Old City, Moshe Zvi Segal, took up residence there, despite the building being heavily damaged by the Jordanian occupation. The building was refurbished and today is a vibrant center located on Chabad Street in the Jewish Quarter.]] Additional congregations were established in Jaffa and other cities. During the time of the Rebbe Rashab, Chabad expanded its presence in Eretz Yisrael with the purchase of a large property in Hebron,[[27: Mussi Sharfstein, “Site of New Hebron Neighborhood Was Purchased by Chabad in 1909,” available at: https://www.lubavitch.com/site-of-new-hebron-neighborhood-was-purchased-by-chabad-in-1909/.]] where it opened a yeshivah. Though the Rebbe sought to avoid conflict during his visit in Eretz Yisrael, he was dragged into controversy within minutes of his arrival. At the Jerusalem train station, flyers were distributed protesting the Rebbe’s plan to meet with Rabbi Kook, describing him in very disparaging terms. Der Tag reported, “A troublemaker dispersed the flyers,[[28: The Rebbe wrote that the flyer stated: “If the Rebbe is meeting with this rasha [liberally translated as ‘evil person,’ referring to Rabbi Kook), it is because the Rebbe does everything for the good of Klal Yisrael (the Jewish people).” It was signed “Chabad Chasidim of Jerusalem.” According to the report in Der Tag, those distributing the flyers were “Charedi extremists with views that are more zealous than Rabbi Sonnenfeld and Agudath Israel.” It is doubtful if they were true Chabad Chasidim.]] and some of the crowd turned on him. His friends stood by his side. The police broke up the fight.”[[29: Quoted in Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh, 68.]] In a letter to his family in Riga, the Rebbe wrote, “The flyers were spread out by the thousands. It is unnecessary to say what kind of fire they ignited.”[[30: Letter written by the Rebbe from the New Central Hotel upon his arrival in Jerusalem.]] He added that his son-in-law the Rashag made a major diplomatic effort to mitigate the damage, finalizing the meeting with Rabbi Kook. That first afternoon, the Rebbe prayed at the Western Wall, a portion of the historic wall that surrounded the Temple Mount in ancient times. The Rebbe made his way on foot through the Old City, accompanied by hundreds of people. A crowd of 1,500 eventually filled the open space in front of the Wall, which was then much smaller than the present broad plaza.[[31: For centuries, the Arabs permitted Jews to pray only in a small area in front of part of the Western Wall. During the British Mandate, Jews were forbidden to blow shofar at the Wall. In 1967, after the liberation of Jerusalem, the area in front of the Wall was cleared, and the broad plaza that is there today was created. The Wall stretches through the Old City; much of it still blocked today by existing structures. Its total length is 1,601 feet.]] Hundreds more looked on from surrounding rooftops. It was a deeply emotional moment for the Rebbe. “I cried hot tears,” he wrote in a private correspondence to his family.[[32: Letter written by the Rebbe from the New Central Hotel upon his arrival in Jerusalem.]] “We were in a higher world. No matter how much you believe, no matter how you believe, in such a holy moment, standing next to the Wall of the Beit HaMikdash (the Holy Temple), everything changes. Religious or not, we completely change.” The Rebbe explained that “everything is elevated as the heart beseeches G-d for mercy.” Most heavily on the Rebbe’s mind at that time was the welfare of the Jews in Russia. “Oceans of tears open up as I feel the plight of our dear students, the Chasidim, and their wives and families, and I ponder their spiritual and physical predicament.” In Jerusalem, he visited with Rabbi Sonnenfeld, the chief Sephardic Rabbi Yaakov Meir, and other Jewish leaders. He met with Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak Kook three times – more than anyone else. The first visit took place in Rabbi Kook’s home on Friday afternoon, where he was greeted by a delegation of rabbis. The second meeting was when Rabbi Kook returned the visit to the Rebbe’s hotel after Shabbat. Their final visit took place before the Rebbe’s departure. Rabbi Kook’s mother[[33: Zlata Perl Kook was 86 at the time of the Rebbe’s visit. She asked the Rebbe for a blessing, and the Rebbe responded by blessing her with long life. She had given her son, Rabbi Kook, a yarmulke that belonged to the third Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel, the Tzemach Tzedek. Rabbi Kook told the Rebbe that he usually wore it on the High Holidays, but he wore it that day in honor of the Rebbe’s visit. Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh, 86.]] descended from a Chabad family, and his writings reflect a great intellectual affinity toward chasidic teachings. The conversations[[34: Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh, chap. 9.]] between the Rebbe and Rabbi Kook alternated between the challenges to world Jewry and profound topics in Torah. Heavy on the Rebbe’s heart, as always, was the plight of Soviet Jewry. “From the moment I left Russia, I cannot stop thinking about the welfare of the Jews there, whose lives are in mortal danger,” he told Rabbi Kook during their first meeting. The Rebbe explained to Rabbi Kook that funds were needed to keep the Jewish education system in Russia afloat. Rabbi Kook suggested the Rebbe meet with Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis, arguably the most influential Jew in the US, and he wrote a recommendation letter. “I have met him, and he fights for the oppressed,” Rabbi Kook told the Rebbe. “When he understands the situation of Russian Jewry, hopefully he will help.”[[35: Ibid.]] Interestingly, Gad Frumkin merited much attention from the Rebbe. He was the only Jewish member of the British Mandate Supreme Court, and the son of a Chabad Chasid. Frumkin had drifted from observance, but the Rebbe recognized that he “had a warm heart.”[[36: Entry in the Rebbe’s diary dated 13 Av, cited in Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh, chap. 21.]] The Rebbe welcomed him in his hotel in Jerusalem and briefly stopped at his home. Frumkin also accompanied the Rebbe in his car on his way to Tel Aviv. Along the way, Frumkin wrote later, “I shared with the Rebbe the progress in building communities in Eretz Yisrael.”[[37: Gad Frumkin, Derekh Shofet BeYerushalayim, cited in Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh.]] While in Jerusalem, the Rebbe dealt with a complex institutional issue. The split between the various streams of Chabad in Russia after the passing of the third Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel, in 1866, was mirrored in the community in Jerusalem. Colel Chabad had come under the sway of the Kopust branch of Chabad. In 1920 the organization’s Jerusalem-based board officially decided to pledge their allegiance to the Rebbe Rashab,[[38: Colel Chabad minutes, Tevet ( January) 1920. It was decided that “everything would be under the instruction of the Lubavitcher Rebbe,” referring to the Rashab. See Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeEretz HaKodesh.]] and after his passing they reaffirmed that pledge to the Rebbe Rayatz. The Rebbe made his acceptance conditional on reforming the organization’s governance and financial procedures.[[39: The Rebbe viewed Colel Chabad as “a sacred obligation.” However, he insisted on having a proper understanding of the finances. “I want to assist in raising the Colel to new heights.” Igrot Kodesh, vol. 16, letter dated 13 Elul, 5688 (August 29, 1928).]] The concerns festered due to the Rebbe’s geographic distance and the differences of opinion amongst the Jerusalem board members. During his Jerusalem visit the Rebbe resolved those issues,[[40: Much of the monies of Colel Chabad were received by post from overseas. The new guidelines included procedures to ensure that all monies were properly recorded, financial statements submitted to the board, etc.]] officially accepting the leadership and appointing Rabbi Shlomo Leib Eliazrov[[41: Rabbi Shlomo Leib Eliazrov (1863–1952) was the grandson of Rabbi Yaakov and Rebbetzin Menucha Rochel Slonim (son-in-law and daughter of the Mitteler Rebbe, Rabbi Dovber of Lubavitch). Rabbi Shlomo Leib served as the chief rabbi of the Ashkenazi community in Hebron. He traveled overseas on at least six missions to raise funds for the community in Hebron. These trips brought him to Bukhara in Southern Russia, where he served as rabbi for a few years. He also visited the Rebbe Rashab in Lubavitch numerous times and developed a strong relationship with the Rebbe Rayatz. He assisted the Rebbe Rashab in the purchase of Beit Romano, a large property in Hebron. He moved to Jerusalem after World War I, becoming the rabbi of the Chabad community there. He was instrumental in the establishment of the Toras Emes yeshivah in Jerusalem.]] as Colel Chabad’s chairman. A new charter was eventually written to formalize the modifications the Rebbe requested.[[42: The charter was formalized in 1933. A copy is printed in Levin, Toldot Chabad BeEretz HaKodesh, 282.]] On Shabbat, crowds converged on Jerusalem from all over the country, and the Rebbe recited a chasidic discourse. On Sunday, the Rebbe continued his spiritual pilgrimage, first to the northern Galilee region, where he visited holy sites in Nablus,[[43: The ancient city of Nablus (Shekhem) is the site of the grave of Yosef HaTzaddik, son of the biblical patriarch Yaakov. This is noted in Joshua 24:32: “The bones of Yosef, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, were buried in Shekhem.” Christian pilgrims as early as Itinerarium Burdigalense in 333 CE note Shekhem as the location of Joseph’s Tomb. Many Jewish pilgrims, including Benjamin Tudela, who writes about his visit in 1160, tell of Jews making a spiritual pilgrimage to Shekhem.]] Tiberias, and Safed.[[44: In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, Safed became a center of Jewish learning, particularly of the mystical teachings of the Kabbalah.]] He prayed at the graves of many great sages,[[45: During the first and second centuries, the center of Jewish scholarship moved to Israel’s north after the Temple’s destruction in 70 CE. Many of the Sages of the Mishnah, which was edited around the year 180 in the north, are buried in the area.]] including Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, Rabbi Yosef Karo, Maimonides, Rabbi Akiva, and Rabbi Menachem Mendel of Vitebsk. He prayed at each stop, at times with great emotion and tears, and read prayer requests that had been sent to him. The most dramatic visit was to Hebron, where Avraham, the first Jew, interred his wife Sarah in the Me’arat Hamakhpelah, the Tomb of the Patriarchs.[[46: Genesis 23.]] The double cave also includes the graves of Yitzchak and Rivkah, and Yaakov and Leah. King Herod erected a massive structure over the cave during the Second Temple era that remains standing today.[[47: There is a massive building covering the entrance to the double cave, where the founders of the Jewish faith are interred. According to most historical accounts, it was erected by Herod over two thousand years ago. (Some historians claim it is of Hasmonean origin, which would put it at 150 years earlier.) See “Secrets of the Tomb of the Patriarchs in Hebron,” available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0__ZgeqxaPA.]] Considered the second most sacred site in Jewish history after the Temple Mount, Hebron was where King David was crowned in 877 BCE.[[48: II Samuel 5:3: “All the elders of Israel came to the king in Hebron, and King David sealed a covenant with them in Hebron before G-d, and they anointed David as king over Israel.” See Oded Avishar, ed., Sefer Chevron ( Jerusalem: Keter Publishing, 1970) for a historical overview.]] Jews and other non-Muslims had been forbidden from entering the Me’arat Hamakhpelah since 1267, eighty years after the Muslims seized Hebron from the Crusaders. Muslim authorities permitted Jews to pray only at the bottom of seven steps, outside the entrance.[[49: “The Seventh Step at the Tomb of Machpela, Hebron, 1913,” available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X2cEDTMV8X8&feature=emb_logo.]] Benjamin of Tudela visited in 1165, before the ban, and was able to enter the cave below and view the graves.[[50: Benjamin Tudela (1130–73) originated from Tudela, Spain and traveled the Jewish world, providing a remarkable account of Jewish life in his time. Tudela describes his visit to the grave in Hebron: If a Jew comes, however, and gives a special reward, the custodian of the cave opens unto him a gate of iron, which was constructed by our forefathers, and then he is able to descend below by means of steps, holding a lighted candle in his hand. He then reaches a cave, in which nothing is to be found, and a cave beyond, which is likewise empty, but when he reaches the third cave, behold there are six sepulchers, those of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, respectively facing those of Sarah, Rebecca, and Leah. And upon the graves are inscriptions cut in stone. Upon the grave of Abraham is engraved “This is the grave of Abraham”; upon that of Isaac, “This is the grave of Isaac, the son of Abraham our father”; upon that of Jacob, “This is the grave of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham our father”; and upon the others, “This is the grave of Sarah,” “This is the grave of Rebecca,” and “This is the grave of Leah.” A lamp burns day and night upon the graves in the cave. (Excerpt from The Itinerary of Benjamin of Tudela, critical text, translation, and commentary by Marcus Nathan Adler, 1907)]] There were some rare instances when the ban was lifted, usually at the insistence of the Turkish sultan; such was done for the prince of Wales in 1862[[51: On rare occasions, non-Muslim visitors were permitted inside the structure, including the Marquis of Bute in 1866, the Crown Prince of Prussia in 1869, and the sons of the Prince of Wales in 1882. At times, Jews, particular women, would dress as Muslims in order to gain entry. In 1935, the Gerrer Rebbe, Rabbi Avraham Mordechai Alter, attempted to visit, but crowds of Muslims blocked his access.]] and the Jewish US ambassador to the Turkish Empire, Henry Morgenthau, in 1914. But the Sultan’s wishes were not always enough; when he requested access for Moses Montefiore in 1838, local religious leaders barred his admission.[[52: Moses Montefiore (1784–1885) was one of the most prestigious leaders of British Jewry in the nineteenth century and a confidant of Queen Victoria. He visited Palestine seven times, the first in 1827. His wife Judith Montefiore wrote in her memoir of their attempt to visit in 1838: “A turbulent throng of Mussulmans was collected in the interior of the mosque, and they were soon joined by the raving dervish. But the rage of the Turks and the howling of the dervish now became more violent than ever, and we decided that it would be prudent to retire without attempting a further entrance.”]] Unlike Benjamin Tudela, those admitted were only given access to the large Herodian structure, not to the cave underneath where the actual burial sites are located. “The Rebbe’s visit was cause for a general celebration. The whole town turned out to welcome this distinguished guest,” wrote David Shainberg, a yeshivah student from Memphis whose correspondence with his family is detailed in Yardena Schwartz’s book Ghosts of a Holy War.[[53: Yardena Schwartz, Ghosts of a Holy War (Union Square, 2024).]] Shainberg was very impressed with the Rebbe. “His appearance is that of a stately king, enhanced by a shining countenance and dignified beard.” He noted that the Rebbe was the leader of “thousands and thousands of Jews in the world. Unlike other chasidic rabbis, the Lubavitcher is a modern, well-dressed personage…. It was an honor to see him at close range and shake his hand.” The Rebbe stopped at the seven steps outside the tomb where Jews traditionally gathered. There, “the Rebbe prayed Minchah for two hours, with sobbing that could be heard in every corner,”[[54: Interview with Sholom Ber Goldschmidt, survivor of the 1929 massacre, available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cNMyTE5l9vw&list=PLeyXYN5APcrjxSVQwDE6dx8sYGgGTDu90.]] remembered Shalom Ber Goldshmidt. Eliezer Don Slonim,[[55: Slonim was a grandson of Rebbetzin Menucha Rochel. He was killed the following Saturday during the Arab riots.]] son of the community’s rabbi and director of the local bank, had a unique relationship with local Arab leaders. Upon Slonim’s request, they permitted the Rebbe to enter the historic Me’arat Hamakhpelah structure. No other rabbinic figure had entered in centuries. The local Jewish community accompanied the Rebbe as he walked to the site, where he was welcomed by Arab notables. Six rabbis joined the Rebbe inside for the historic visit, including Rabbi Shlomo Zalman Klonski, who described the moment:[[56: Avishar, Sefer Chevron, 261.]] “The Rebbe walked with an entourage of Arabs and Jews slowly following behind him.” The Arabs noted the large memorial stones that were covered with decorative tapestries over the graves of the patriarchs and matriarchs below. For the Rebbe, it was a deeply spiritual experience. The anti-Semitic mufti of Jerusalem, Mohammed Amin al-Husseini,[[57: Mohammed Amin al-Husseini (1897–1974) was appointed mufti of Jerusalem by the British Mandate. He was a fierce opponent to Zionism. He organized riots in Palestine in 1920 to protest the Balfour Declaration, instigated the massacre in 1929, and led the 1936 Arab Revolt. With the onset of World War II, he went to Berlin, where he met with top German officials including Hitler and encouraged the Holocaust.]] telegrammed local authorities, demanding that the Rebbe’s access be blocked, but his message was received after the Rebbe finished his visit. As the Rebbe left, he dispensed charity to the local Arab poor.[[58: Interview with Shalom Ber Goldschmidt. See also “Sholom Ber Goldshmid: Child Survivor Continued Family Legacy,” available at: http://en.hebron.org.il/history/507.]] The Rebbe also met with Jewish leaders, had private audiences with community members, and visited local institutions and the property purchased by his father. Tragically, just eleven days later, after the Rebbe departed Eretz Yisrael, Arabs attacked Jews throughout Palestine. Jerusalem’s mufti incited Arab mobs, using Jewish prayer at the Western Wall in Jerusalem as a pretext. The larger issue was the growing Jewish presence in Eretz Yisrael. The greatest violence took place in Hebron, where sixty-four Jewish men, women, and children,[[59: “In Memoriam: Full List of the Victims of the 1929 Hebron Massacre,” available at: http://en.hebron.org.il/history/520.]] many of them Chabad Chasidim, including David Shainberg, were murdered in cold blood. The Rebbe spent a second Shabbat in Jerusalem and then went on to Tel Aviv, where a large entourage followed him. “Dozens of buses filled with Chasidim escorted the Rebbe to Tel Aviv,” describes Gad Frumkin in his autobiography.[[60: Cited in Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh.]] “At the entrance to Tel Aviv, a crowd of two thousand gathered, local officials welcomed him, and large crowds converged on his hotel.” From there, the Rebbe visited Petach Tikvah and Bnei Brak, and had a private evening excursion with Frumkin to the nearby agriculture settlement of Rechovot.[[61: They visited the developing community of Rechovot some sixteen miles from Tel Aviv. Frumkin says that unfortunately, by the time they arrived it was dark, and the Rebbe could not see much of the community.]] After a whirlwind visit of two weeks, on Thursday, August 22,[[62: Av 5689.]] the Rebbe began the long journey to the United States via Egypt and Europe. His visit to Eretz Yisrael was a magnificent success. The Rebbe had the opportunity to pray at the important holy sites. He was the only known Jewish rabbinic leader in centuries to visit Me’arat HaMakhpelah in Hebron. Thousands had greeted him, hundreds had private meetings, and many were inspired by his recitation of chasidic discourses.[[63: For the Rebbe’s maamarim, some of which are extant, see Sefer HaMaamarim, 5689 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot, 2022).]] He met with the country’s most noted rabbis and other leaders from a wide spectrum of the Jewish community. The visit had put the Chasidim in Eretz Yisrael on a spiritual high. Many had taken time off their daily activities to be part of the Rebbe’s entourage as he traveled around the county. “During the Rebbe’s visit in Eretz Yisrael, we felt a spiritual elevation and sense of sanctity,” wrote Rabbi Shimon Glitzenstein. Fifteen busloads of Chasidim escorted the Rebbe from his hotel in Tel Aviv to the train station in Lod, where a large crowd waited to bid the Rebbe farewell. There the Rebbe said his last goodbyes, Glitzenstein recalls.[[64: Rabbi Shimon Glitzenstein, Diary of the Visit of the Rebbe to Eretz Yisrael, excerpted in Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh, 212.]] “The Rebbe was very emotional, and gave his blessing to each and every person.” He then distributed a printed maamar so that he would depart by sharing words of Torah. The Rebbe traveled to Cairo[[65: The Rebbe spent a night in Cairo. During the night, he went to visit the pyramids in Giza. Rotenberg, Masa HaRebbe BeEretz HaKodesh.]] and then took the train to Alexandria. Local Jewish community leaders came to welcome him. In 1984, when the Arabic-speaking Rabbi Shimon Elituv[[66: JEM Oral History Project, transcript of Rabbi Shimon Elituv. He traveled to Egypt in 1984 at the Rebbe’s request to conduct a ceremony in the home of Maimonides in Cairo in honor of the conclusion of the study of Maimonides’s Mishneh Torah. During the trip, he spent a few days in Alexandria visiting the Eliyahu HaNavi synagogue, where he heard the story from the leader of the community. Elituv says, “He told the story over with great emotion, describing what he saw when he accompanied his father to welcome the Rebbe in 1929.” Prior to World War II, there were more than twenty-seven thousand Jews in the city; with the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948, the vast majority left. The Eliyahu HaNavi synagogue was built in 1354 and refurbished by the Egyptian government in 2020.]] visited the small Jewish community in Alexandria, its leader recalled with excitement the Rebbe’s visit some fifty-six years earlier. “A European-looking man came to the train station to welcome the Rebbe, carrying a large platter of fruit.” He explained to the Rebbe that as child he had accompanied his grandfather to meet the fourth Rebbe, Rabbi Shmuel, in Lubavitch.[[67: It seems this incident happened in 1882, shortly before the passing of Rabbi Shmuel.]] His grandfather told Rabbi Shmuel, “During the Temple era, Jews would bring their first fruits to the Temple. Now I am bringing my first fruits to you,” asking Rabbi Shmuel to bless his grandson. At the time the Rayatz was almost three years old and was playing in his grandfather’s study. Rabbi Shmuel responded, “Just as you have brought me fruits, so too I bless you that one day your grandson will bring fruits to my grandson.” When the man heard the Rebbe was traveling via Alexandria, he recalled the story and decided to fulfill the blessing by bringing the Rebbe a beautiful platter. In 1984, the leader of the local community told Rabbi Elituv that the Rebbe was deeply touched and responded that he remembered as a child being in his grandfather’s study and hearing the blessing he gave. On Sunday, as the ship made its way from Alexandria to Italy, news of the Arab riots in Eretz Yisrael and the massacre in Hebron reached the Rebbe. Grief over the terrible bloodbath caused him to become seriously ill. As he wrote to Rabbi Kook soon afterward, “I became sick from pain and anguish after hearing the distressing news.” Fortunately, Dr. Moshe Wallach, medical director of Shaarei Zedek hospital in Jerusalem, was onboard and nurtured the Rebbe back to health.[[68: The Rebbe suffered from pain in his kidneys and spent most of the trip immobilized in his room. Dr. Moshe Wallach (1866–1957) had immigrated to Eretz Yisrael from Germany in 1890. He was a religious Jew known for his piety and unusual dedication to his patients. He founded Jerusalem’s Shaarei Zedek Hospital in 1902, establishing a protocol of Shabbat observance and respect for Jewish tradition. Today it is one of the premiere medical centers in Israel. The Rebbe was very impressed by Dr. Wallach’s sensitivity and care and wrote about him in laudatory terms, calling him “a wise man with fear of Heaven.” Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Rabbi Kook dated 21 Elul, 5689 (September 26, 1929).]] The Rebbe and the Rashag made their way to Berlin and France, where they were joined for the trip to the US by the Rebbe’s uncle Moshe Horenstein, Mordechai Dubin, and the Rebbe’s secretary Rabbi Yechezkel Feigin.[[69: Horenstein and Dubin would return to Europe after a few months; Feigin would remain with the Rebbe in the US.]] They arrived in New York Harbor on Tuesday, September 17, 1929. Hundreds of Chasidim and well-wishers greeted the Rebbe as he strode off the boat escorted by New York police. During his ten-month sojourn in the US, the Rebbe traveled as far north as Boston and as far west as St. Louis. He visited most of the major Jewish population centers, including Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Detroit, also making stops in smaller towns like Milwaukee, Springfield, and Worcester. The Rebbe spent most of his time in the Crown Heights and Brownsville sections of Brooklyn, as well as three months in Chicago. He visited Washington, DC, twice: once to meet with Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis and once to meet with President Herbert Hoover in the White House before departing the US. In each city, the Rebbe was greeted by massive crowds. The Rebbe was provided an apartment in Crown Heights, then an upscale Brooklyn neighborhood. It was home to the imposing Brooklyn Jewish Center, the largest Conservative Temple in the United States. A few miles away was Brownsville, then called “Jerusalem of America,” which brimmed with Yiddish speakers, many of whom remained steadfast in tradition. When the Rebbe relocated to the US a decade later, he chose to live in Crown Heights. In 1929, the city was teeming with immigrants who were moving up the economic scale and slowly dispensing with observance. Only twelve percent of Brooklyn’s Jewish children received any Jewish education in the 1920s.[[70: Most of the Jewish schools were supplementary. Most Jewish children attended public school; very few went to yeshivas or day schools. Jonathan Sarna, American Judaism, 2nd edition (Yale University Press, 2019), 225.]] Aside from the few yeshivas, such as Yeshivah Torah Vodaath in Williamsburg and Yeshivas Rabbeinu Yitzchak Elchonon, which had just relocated from the Lower East Side to Washington Heights,[[71: Yeshivas Rabbeinu Yitzchok Elchonon was founded in 1896, becoming Yeshivah College in 1928 and later Yeshivah University. Yeshivah Torah Vodaath started in 1918 in Williamsburg. Serious Jewish scholarship was still based in Europe, and until the onset of the war in 1939, students who wanted to pursue higher levels of Jewish learning traveled to Poland, Lithuania, and Eretz Yisrael.]] there were few Jewish schools. America had yet to become a center of Jewish scholarship. One of the Rebbe’s goals was to rekindle the connection with immigrants who had a chasidic background. As Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson wrote, “The earlier rounds of immigrants were traditional Jews, most not fully observant, and few actual Torah scholars.”[[72: Zikhron Livnei Yisrael – Memoirs of Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson: 1907–1939 [Hebrew] (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1996), chap. 22.]] With the rise of pogroms, the disruptions caused by World War I, and the Russian revolution, more passionately religious immigrants came. In the 1920s and 1930s, there were some forty Chabad synagogues[[73: A 1943 report explains that the synagogues also played a social role, as they created opportunities for immigrants to see friends from the old country. They also established social welfare institutions and burial societies. The small national Chabad organization Agudas Chassidei Chabad, founded in 1924, was still in its infancy and attempted – with moderate success – to connect to these synagogues. Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1988), chap. 26.]] in New York City, and many more across the country. Some were filled with Chasidim, while others simply had a nostalgic tie to Chabad. Many immigrants still attended synagogue, some for religious reasons, others to connect to friends from Europe.[[74: With time, many of these immigrant congregations closed or merged as Jews moved from the inner city to the suburbs and drifted from traditional observance.]] For the Chasidim, the Rebbe’s visit was spiritually uplifting. For generations, Chasidim had traveled to the Rebbe in Lubavitch, and now the Rebbe had come to them in the New World. For the High Holidays, the Rebbe attended a large synagogue in Brownsville, where he prayed at great length. On Rosh HaShanah the Rebbe recited a maamar.[[75: Sefer HaMaamarim – Kuntresim, “Zeh HaYom Techilat Maasekha” (Brooklyn, New York: Kehot Publication Society), 1:69.]] Years later, Yehoshua Greenberg, who was present for that maamar, told his grandson, “The shul was packed, and many gathered outdoors. The Rebbe’s voice was booming, and even those outside heard him.”[[76: Interview with his grandson, Rabbi Heschel Greenberg.]] The Rebbe spent Simchat Torah in Crown Heights with a few thousand people who came to celebrate during the forty-eight-hour holiday. The crowd attending the farbrengens and listening to the Rebbe’s talks was diverse. “An elderly Chasid, a rabbi with a dignified beard, a clean-shaven man with a golden chain and a ring on his finger, a non-Chasid wearing a tall hat, a beardless Rabbi, and a student, all standing, this one in this corner, and that one in that corner, and listening attentively,” wrote the Rebbe to his wife, describing the people listening to the maamar.[[77: Sefer HaSichos, 5688–91 (2021 edition).]] It was a festive holiday, with dancing that lasted till 2:30 a.m. The next day the celebration continued with a farbrengen, singing, and dancing that lasted late into the day. Late in the afternoon, the Rebbe was visited by Reform Rabbi Stephen S. Wise. The two entered the Rebbe’s residence to speak privately as the singing of Chasidim could be heard echoing in the background. The next day, Weiss told his students in Manhattan, “It is worthwhile for you to visit the chakham, the wise leader of the Jewish people, in Brooklyn.”[[78: Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, 176.]] The celebration continued after sunset,[[79: According to Jewish law, a holiday celebration can continue into the evening, past the time that the holiday actually ends, if the participants have not prayed the evening services and made Havdalah. Others who had formally ended the holiday traveled to join in the Rebbe’s farbrengen. Also present were reporters from the local Jewish press.]] with Jews from all over Brooklyn and Manhattan joining the farbrengen that lasted well into the night. “The crowd was very enthusiastic,” the Rebbe wrote to his wife.[[80: In a letter to his wife, the Rebbe described the crowd: “The crowd was very enthusiastic. At the farbrengen there were editors and correspondents from the media, reform rabbis, and well-educated people, as well as Temimim (Yeshivah alumni) and [other] Chasidim. There was great enthusiasm and joy.” Sefer HaSichos, 5688–91 (2021 edition).]] He gave a series of talks interspersed with singing, outlining a vision for American Jewry.[[81: Originally published in New York in a booklet after the farbrengen. A second version with edits and additions was published in 1937 and was printed in Likkutei Dibburim, vol. 2. An English version appears in Likkutei Dibburim, (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2021), 2:227. For the original Yiddish of the second version, see Sefer HaSichos, 5688–91, 84.]] The Rebbe recounted the famous story of the founder of Chasidism, Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov: When his soul ascended on high[[82: According to a letter written by the Baal Shem Tov to his brother-in-law, this occurred in 1746 (5507). See “The Chamber of Mashiach,” available at: chabad.org/380401; Levi Haskelevich, “Baal Shem Tov: When is Moshiach Coming?” available at: https://www.sefaria.org/sheets/90076?lang=bi.]] and encountered the Messiah, he asked, “Master, when are you coming?” Replied the Messiah, “When your wellsprings will spread to the outside,” meaning, when your teachings will be disseminated. The Rebbe stated, “Now the time has come to bring the esoteric teachings of Torah to America.” The Rebbe was alluding to an important Jewish mystical concept, says Rabbi Shmuel Kaplan, a veteran Chabad shliach in Baltimore. “Rabbi Dov Ber, the second Chabad Rebbe, explains that Torah had not been taught in what the mystics call ‘kadur hatachton,’”[[83: Chasidic thought refers to the Western hemisphere as kadur hatachton, literally, the bottom half of the world. It is explained that as Jews spread through the world, they unleash its spiritual potential by studying Torah and observing the commandments. As Jews settled in the Western hemisphere, they revealed the inherent “sparks of holiness” that had been embedded there after creation. Rabbi Eliyahu Wolf, “Chetzi Kadur HaTachton” [Hebrew], available at: https://col.org.il/news/139305.]] the Western Hemisphere. At the time, many were lamenting the spiritual state of American Jews, in particular the younger generation. The Rebbe took a more optimistic view. “I do not despair of the offspring of Chasidim who have wandered afield. Even those who have drifted have an inner spark of faith for which their parents sacrificed, and it can be awakened in them.” In America, the Rebbe told the crowd, the teachings of the Baal Shem Tov would ultimately become widespread. The ground was fertile for a renaissance of Torah and spirituality. And that would set the stage for the ultimate redemption, as promised in Jewish teachings. These talks laid out a broad vision for revelation of the deep teachings of Torah in a fertile new realm. The exile of the Jews from their homeland, first to Babylonia in the east and then Europe to the west, brought the teachings of Torah to part of the globe. Now the time was ripe to bring Torah to the Western World on the other half of the globe, the new spiritual frontier. In America, the Rebbe forged ahead with two of his primary goals: to connect with his Chasidim and to strengthen the broad spectrum of Jewish life. On the financial front, the Rebbe managed to raise significant funds, though his efforts were hindered by the beginning of the Depression. But when he reached out to the leaders of the Jewish establishment, primarily the Joint Distribution Committee, for financial help, he did not have success. The JDC had supported the Rebbe’s operations, including job training and educational activities, on and off while he was in Russia, but it had begun to curtail funding in 1925. The senior JDC executives in Moscow and Berlin, Dr. Joseph Rosen and Dr. Bernard Kahn, each wrote to their New York headquarters, saying, “The Rebbe is the only reliable way to help Jews in Russia.”[[84: From December 1927 to October 1928, there was extensive correspondence between JDC leaders in the US and Europe. Rosen and Kahn, the JDC’s European senior staff, recommended working with the Rebbe. But American Jewish leaders were reluctant, as Joseph Hyman writes in a memo dated October 13, 1928: “While Rabbi Schneersohn might have the simplest and most practical method of handling it, it might involve some of the rabbis and expose them to danger.” The absurdity of this assertion is that their very practice of Judaism under the Communist regime and the oppression of the Yevesektzkia put them in danger. Support of American Jews might make it easier to avert that danger. If more Jews could be trained for home-based handicraft industries, that would make them self-sufficient. Louis Marshall, who was also from a German Jewish background and founded the American Jewish Committee, wrote to Adler (who was sympathetic to the Rebbe) a few months earlier, in August 1928. While referring to the Rebbe as the “indefatigable Schneersohn,” Marshall went on to say that after consultations with European Jewish groups, they “unanimously decided that the risks attendant on carrying out the program of Schneersohn was too great as to forbid our undertaking in any way to cooperate. However, there was a general feeling of distrust of Schneersohn.” It was a strange dichotomy: The JDC staff on the ground who knew the Rebbe repeatedly asserted that working with him was the most reliable way to help Russian Jews. And yet Jewish leaders in the US, many of them assimilated German Jewish immigrants, sought reasons not to support him. Clearly, the issues here are deeper. Jewish leaders in the US cared about Jews around the world, but they did not see the preservation of Jewish tradition as an important goal; on a personal level, most had abandoned observance. For the Rebbe, on the other hand, Torah, tradition, and spirituality were the central mission of his life. The arguments that Hyman, Marshall, and others used as reasons for not supporting the Rebbe were justification for a deeper ideological opposition to the ideals he espoused. See JDC Archives, correspondence between Adler and Marshall.]] But JDC leaders in New York chose to ignore those recommendations, expressing concern about the legality of transferring funds to Russia for what they called “cultural work” – code for religious life. Now in America, the Rebbe would have an opportunity to meet the leadership directly. As the Rebbe wrote to Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz in Boston, “When I was preparing for the visit to the US, I understood that it was essential to work with the JDC.”[[85: Igrot Kodesh 11:108, letter dated 2 Adar, 5690 (March 2, 1930).]] Upon his arrival, he attempted to set up a meeting with Felix Warburg,[[86: Felix Warburg (1871–1937) was a member of the German Jewish banking family. He immigrated to the US at the age of twenty-three and married Freda Schiff, the daughter of one of the most affluent Jews in America, German-born banker Jacob Schiff. For more, see “Felix M. Warburg Dead at 66,” JTA, Oct. 21, 1937, available at: https://www.jta.org/1937/10/21/archive/felix-m-warburg-dead-at-66.]] chairman of the JDC. Warburg rebuffed the request, suggesting that the Rebbe meet with Dr. Cyrus Adler,[[87: Dr. Cyrus Adler (1863–1940) was born in Arkansas; his family moved to Philadelphia to be closer to the Jewish community. He was greatly influenced by Orthodox Rabbi Sabato Morais. Adler was the first American Jew to earn a doctorate in Semitic languages. He was the founder of Dropsie College for Hebrew and Cognate Learning (Philadelphia) and served as chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary from 1915 to 1940. (At the time, it was far more traditional than it is today.) He was close to the many prominent Jewish philanthropists and had a much greater affinity for tradition than other JDC leaders, most of whom came from the German Jewish community in the US.]] chairman of the JDC Cultural Committee, which provided funding for Jewish educational and religious programs throughout the world. Adler was a traditional Jew, educated in Orthodox schools. As a young man, he had gotten to know firsthand the plight of Russian Jewish refugees in Philadelphia. Just after Rosh HaShanah, the Rebbe and Adler met. Dr. Joseph Hyman, director of the JDC, prepared a confidential memorandum[[88: Confidential Memorandum from J.C. Hyman to Dr. Cyrus Adler, October 7, 1929, JDC Archives.]] in advance of the meeting. He raised many doubts about supporting the Rebbe’s projects, including the legality of transferring funds due to Russian currency regulations. Still, he asserted that the JDC could help the Rebbe. “It’s possible to carry out this work on the condition that there be no publicity and no noise. No brass bands.”[[89: Hyman notes that religious life is not outlawed. What is illegal are schools with more than three children under the age of 18. Transferring funds to Russia for religious programs was restricted by Russian regulations that limited foreign currency in Russia. Hyman wrote that the Rebbe was able to create a mechanism to overcome this problem by providing the funds to Jews in Riga who could not transfer assets beyond the borders of Russia, and then getting rubles from them in Russia.]] Hyman noted that the Rebbe had created a reliable mechanism to secretly transfer funds to Russia. He referred to the Rebbe as “our friend,” never actually using his name. The Rebbe was deeply impressed with Adler, writing to his wife back in Riga, “He is very serious, with a scholarly face, and great Jewish sensitivity.”[[90: Letter to the Rebbe’s wife.]] They met again a month later. In an internal JDC memo describing the meetings, Adler notes the difficulties of religious life in Russia and the economic woes and is clearly sympathetic to the Rebbe and open to ideas on how to legally transfer funds.[[91: Memorandum of Dr. Cyrus Adler on the meeting of October 9, 1929. JDC Archives.]] At the second meeting, Adler assured the Rebbe that the JDC would help in a significant way, but it would be done secretly.[[92: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 11.]] That commitment was not honored. It was Felix Warburg, chair of the JDC, who disagreed with the Rebbe on the best strategy to help Russian Jews. Warburg was an American banker who supported the partnership with the Soviets in transferring Jews to communal farms.[[93: “Warburg Pledges $1,000,000 to Fund,” New York Times archives, available at: https://www.nytimes.com/1928/04/25/archives/warburg-pledges-1000000-to-fund-will-be-used-to-establish-jews-on.html?auth=link-dismiss-google1tap.]] In 1927, he traveled to Russia, meeting the Rebbe and a delegation of rabbis twice and promising help that did not materialize.[[94: Igrot Kodesh 1:516. In a long letter, the Rebbe describes the history of his efforts for Soviet Jewry. He discusses the meeting with Warburg on page 534.]] Warburg also visited the agricultural colonies and was impressed as he witnessed Jews lining up with farming utensils, looking like they were creating a new life. The Communists put on a good show when he toured the farm towns named after him, Warburg-4 and Warburg-5.[[95: “Felix M. Warburg is Honored by Jewish Colonists in Russia,” JTA, May 18, 1927, available at: https://www.jta.org/1927/05/18/archive/felix-m-warburg-is-honored-by-jewish-colonists-in-russia.]] His brief, staged visit inspired him to become a champion of forced collectivization. “For a man pampered with luxury, he responded to those threadbare outposts with the glad-handing gusto of a politician in the hustings,”[[96: Ron Chernow, The Warburgs: The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family (Vintage Books, 2003), 294.]] wrote Ron Chernow, Warburg’s biographer. “The settlements evolved into a bizarre hybrid of Park Avenue charity and Marxist agriculture,” with wealthy Jews of New York partnering with the Communists, funding their goal of socialism. Uprooted from their friends, relatives, and community, Russian Jews were denied the individual right to choose their economic and religious path, yet some still hoped that the colonies would bring financial stability. As early as June 1925,[[97: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter to “philanthropists of the Joint” dated 25 Sivan, 5685 ( June 17, 1925).]] the Rebbe wrote to the board of the JDC expressing his concerns over the project. The following year, the Rebbe dispatched a long letter to Warburg about the settlements.[[98: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter to Warburg dated 27 Iyar, 5686 (May 11, 1926).]] While not expressing direct opposition, he raised important questions about the religious services and the wisdom of forcibly moving Jews to Ukraine. He requested support to train Russian Jews with skills that would ensure their livelihoods. “In the name of thousands of Jews, take upon yourself the provision of melekhet yad, home-based industries for Jews.” The Rebbe requested that the JDC provide three things: one, facilities and religious services in the settlements they were establishing; two, funding for Jews living in urban areas to train in home-based industries; and three, subsidies for rabbis and religious functionaries. A few weeks later, the Rebbe also wrote to JDC vice chair Sam Rosenberg, with whom he had met in Russia, “The Jewish people are looking up to you and your colleagues.” The Rebbe urged the JDC to intercede with the Russian government as Jewish British leader Sir Moses Montefiore[[99: In 1846, Montefiore, an observant Jew and a confidant of Queen Victoria, met with Czar Nicholas I in St. Petersburg to urge him to improve conditions for the Jews. This was one of a series of trips across the world that Montefiore undertook to assist his brethren. He also visited Romania, Rome, and Morocco, and went to Russia for the second time in 1876. David Sorkin, “Montefiore and the Politics of Emancipation,” available at: https://jewishreviewofbooks.com/articles/174/montefiore-and-the-politics-of-emancipation/.]] had done in the nineteenth century when he traveled to St. Petersburg to meet the czar in an attempt to convince him to improve the conditions of Jews in Russia. “Likewise, today the Jewish people will be saved through your efforts and those of your colleagues.”[[100: Igrot Kodesh 1:527–28.]] The Rebbe wanted the JDC to use its influence to speak up for religious rights, support Jewish education, and provide ways for Jews to become self-sufficient. For a short time, the JDC indeed provided funding for training in home-based industries According to historian Zvi Bauer,[[101: Yehuda Bauer, My Brother’s Keeper: A History of the JDC, 1929–1939 ( Jewish Publication Society, 1974)]] JDC leaders did not believe there was a “specific Jewish problem in Russia anymore,” as Communism had lifted the czarist restrictions on Jews. Instead, the saw the challenges to “Russian Jewry in pure economic terms” and they wantedd to help their fellow Jews. To advance these projects, in 1924 the JDC created a subsidiary corporation, Agro-Joint, to work in cooperation with the Communist regime. As Professor Michael Beizer writes, “The program remained operational for fourteen years, during which time 200,000 Soviet Jews were transformed from urban dwellers to peasants.”[[102: Michael Beizer, Relief in Time of Need: Russian Jewry and the Joint, 1914–24 (Bloomington, IN: Slavica Publishers, 2015), 233–34.]] Historian Zvi Gitelman was struck by the strange coalition. “The American Joint Distribution Committee, a thoroughly ‘bourgeois’ organization backed by some of the most prominent bankers and financiers of the American Jewish establishment, supported the agriculture colonies.”[[103: Zvi Gitelman, A Century of Ambivalence: The Jews of Russia and the Soviet Union, 1881 to the Present (Indiana University Press, 2001), chap. 3.]] The Rebbe hoped that in America he would be able to convince the JDC leaders to rethink their Russian strategy. But as he was lobbying the JDC, an incident in Russia derailed that plan. In February 1930, a group of rabbis was arrested in Minsk. JTA, the Jewish news service, reported: “The secret police also searched the synagogues and say that it discovered documents that show that the community is a counter-revolutionary organization supplying information to anti-Soviet bodies abroad. Rabbi Pevsner was directly accused of receiving and executing instructions from Riga from Rabbi Joseph Schneersohn, the Lubavitcher Rabbi, who is now in the United States. The GPU asserts that it found at Rabbi Pevsner’s home a letter in Rabbi Schneersohn’s handwriting containing instructions on how to organize illegal rabbinical seminaries and Hebrew schools, and how to strengthen Jewish religious life.”[[104: “Leaders of Minsk Kehillah Arrested by G.P.U.; Charged with Counter-revolution,” JTA, Feb. 17, 1930, available at: https://www.jta.org/1930/02/17/archive/leaders-of-minsk-kehillah-arrested-by-g-p-u-charged-with-counter-revolution.]] The arrest emboldened those in the JDC, led by Warburg, who opposed funding the Rebbe’s activities, ignoring cables from their Berlin office saying that Stalin had started a crackdown against the Jews.[[105: A month before the Minsk raid, the JDC office in Berlin sent a disturbing cable to headquarters in New York warning that the Russian government was targeting Jews: “Stalin is working in a ruthless fashion.” Chernow, The Warburgs, 295.]] Fearing that association with the Rebbe might damage their standing in Russia, they refused any more support for the Rebbe’s Russian network.[[106: They failed to realize that the Soviet regime at the time was desperate for foreign currency, its status on the international stage still precarious. The US would not recognize the country until 1933. If JDC leaders had used their influence, they might have mitigated, even partially, Stalin’s anti-religious agenda.]] Some in the JDC leadership remained sympathetic to the Rebbe. Professor Cyrus Adler made personal donations and attempted to help in other ways. He believed that the JDC’s unwillingness to speak out was wrong. “I am not willing to take the attitude that every vestige of Judaism shall be destroyed in Russia with our silence, which means assent,” he wrote to Joseph Hyman in February 1932.[[107: Letter dated February 2, 1932, JDC Archives. Adler also suggests in the letter that the Russians are attempting to defraud the JDC.]] A few days later, Warburg wrote to Hyman, chastising Adler.[[108: Letter from Warburg to Hyman dated February 5, 1932. The letter is filled with a sense of privilege, entitlement, and disdain for Jewish tradition and the Rebbe personally. This despite the support of Dr. Rosen, the JDC director in Russia, who repeatedly told leaders in New York that the Rebbe was the sole address to connect to the Jews in Russia, and time and again attested to his reliability.]] It was “stupidity” and “a waste of time” to support efforts to bolster religious life in Russia, he said. “Any act of ours to save the Jewish religion in Russia would have had any but tragic results.” Warburg did not believe that “youth in Russia have any interest in those things,”[[109: Ibid.]] referring to Jewish observance. He was under the illusion that there was no anti-Semitism in Russia, claiming, “Jews are treated as well as the rest of the population.” This in a period described by historian Nora Levin as being filled with the “mass persecution of prominent Jews.”[[110: Nora Levin, The Jews in the Soviet Union Since 1917 (New York University Press, 1988), chap. 12.]] In 1932, Warburg rejected the Rebbe’s campaign to send matzah[[111: In 1929, the JDC had provided a grant of $10,000 for the Rebbe’s matzah campaign.]] to Russian Jews, even though Russia was in the throes of severe famine.[[112: There had been a famine in Russia in 1931–33, prompted by the unsuccessful farm collectivization. It is striking that Warburg, the chairman of the Joint, was not aware of the crisis in Russia, or if he knew, that he was so dismissive of the need to provide matzah for Russian Jews. Stephen Kotkin, Stalin: Waiting for Hitler, 1929–1941 (Penguin Press, 2017).]] Insisting that Jews were in possession of flour, he said, “If they wish to bake their bread in the form of matzos instead of bread during the holidays, they can do so.” Warburg was still clinging to the misconceptions formed during his staged visit a few years earlier. In his mind, he was saving Jews by assisting in their integration into the new Soviet paradise. Warburg expressed disdain for the Rebbe, writing, “I have no confidence in Schneersohn.”[[113: Warburg was also blustery and harsh with others. His relationship with Chaim Weizmann, for example, was marked by both close camaraderie and acrimonious debates. Warburg supported efforts to build Hebrew University and settlements in Palestine, but he did not share Weizmann’s goal of Jewish sovereignty. See Chernow, The Warburgs.]] Lingering under the surface was his own view toward tradition. German immigrants like Warburg had abandoned observance. As Chernow writes, he would make “an appearance”[[114: Ibid.]] on Yom Kippur at Temple Emanuel, the gothic-style Reform temple in Manhattan. Bauer says that the Jewish faith and tradition “were of marginal concern” to Warburg. As a Reform Jew, he wanted to “break down the barriers between a Jew and his neighbors.” In contrast, the Rebbe, while deeply concerned about the economic welfare of Russian Jews, believed that Judaism was essential. The JDC began to wind down the Agro-Joint beginning in 1936, as the farming communities gained economic stability. They did not anticipate the wave of terror that Stalin would unleash that would bring a tragic end to the JDC-Soviet partnership. In 1937, Stalin turned his secret police on JDC workers, arresting close to two hundred of them for being associated with a “foreign organization.”[[115: Mikhail Mitsel, “The Final Chapter: Agro-Joint Workers – Victims of the Great Terror in the USSR, 1937–1940.” This publication includes a list of close to two hundred Agro-Joint staff who suffered a terrible fate in Stalin’s reign of terror, available at: http://catalog.nypl.org/search/o830123542.]] Many were shot; some died in prison or remained in jail for long periods. The majority of those targeted were Russian. Also included were forty-one German physicians who had come to the settlements to provide medical services. Seventeen doctors were shot or died in the Soviet prison camps; others were deported. Rosen, head of the JDC in Russia, protested unsuccessfully to officials in Russia. It took time for reports of the purges to arrive in New York,[[116: One could argue that information from Russia was limited, and the JDC officials at the time did not understand exactly what was happening thousands of miles away.]] and even then, the JDC remained silent.[[117: Mitsel writes that “comprehension of the USSR and Stalin’s regime by JDC officials in New York, especially Rosenberg, chairman of Agro-Joint trustees, was to remain naive and idealistic.”]] News of the expulsion, imprisonment, and murder of JDC staff would have put a damper on its image.[[118: Publicity about the forced shutdown of its program and the expulsion, imprisonment, and murder of many of the staff would have been a PR disaster, undermining community confidence and negatively impacting JDC fundraising. Instead, the JDC kept silent and apparently attempted to cover up the extent of the catastrophe that befell its organization and its workers in Russia.]] Instead, they continued to paint a glowing picture of life in the Soviet Union.[[119: One might make the argument that Jews in the US at the time did not feel the sense of security and political empowerment that they feel today, and they were therefore wary of raising the issue. But the JDC board was composed of very influential and wealthy Jews who must have had connections to leaders in Washington. The chairman of the JDC at the time was Paul Baerwald, a German Jewish immigrant who was an influential banker. In 1938 he was appointed to President Franklin Roosevelt’s Advisory Committee on Political Refugees, and he was a close friend of New York Governor Herbert Lehman. Clearly, connections to senior government officials were in place. However, it seems they never used them to attempt to help their staff suffering in Russia.]] In 1939, Hyman wrote an extensive assessment of the JDC’s achievements in Russia for the American Jewish Yearbook, saying, “In less than a decade and a half, the work of the Agro-Joint helped transform Russian Jewry from a downtrodden, almost helpless ghetto population into self-reliant and productive workers of the field and factory,”[[120: American Jewish Yearbook, 1939–40 ( Jewish Publication Society), 41:156–61.]] not revealing[[121: The story of these JDC staffers was regulated to two sentences in Bauer’s history of the JDC. “This was the sum total of the eviction of the Agro-Joint and the arrest and death of most, possibly all of its Russian Jewish officials. There were achievements and there were disasters.” The real story of those who suffered under the purge remained a distant memory until Mikhail Mitsel, who is today the JDC historian, published in Kiev in 2012 a long account of this tragic episode in Russian. Later, a shorter version was published in English: “The Final Chapter: Agro-Joint Workers – Victims of the Great Terror in the USSR, 1937–1940,” available at: https://kehilalinks.jewishgen.org/Colonies_of_Ukraine/The_Final_Chapter_Agro-Joint_in_the_Yea.pdf.]] that close to two hundred Agro-Joint staff were killed, imprisoned, or deported, or that all JDC assets in Russia were seized by the Communist regime. Instead, Hyman lauded the JDC efforts in Russia as “one of the most amazing feats of human engineering in modern history.” The reality was different. “However worthy and ambitious the experiment, it had backfired,” Chernow writes. The JDC did its best to hide the tragic end. “The episode was buried, forgotten, and obliterated. Most people don’t know that in the 1920s, American capitalists had briefly been the largest landlord in the Soviet Union.”[[122: Chernow, The Warburgs, chap. 21.]] In the coming years, the numbers of Jewish farmers dropped. As Nora Levin writes, “The last days of Jewish agriculture were tragic.” By 1939, just six percent of employed Russian Jews were farmers. “Hopes for secure and lasting Jewish peasantry which might have provided a territorial base for Jewish autonomy crumbled.” Those remaining on the farms came under German occupation and “Jews were massacred.” After the war, some Jews wanted to return to the region, but instead “the government encouraged them to move to remote Birobidzhan.”[[123: In the 1930s, Russia attempted to set up a Jewish province in Birobidzhan in remote Siberia. The official language was Yiddish. A few thousand Jews still live there today.]] In 1965, the editorial committee of Sovetish Heymland considered doing a story on Jewish agriculture and concluded, “The Jewish village no longer existed.”[[124: Levin, The Jews in the Soviet Union Since 1917, 238, 858, note 58.]] According to Hyman, the JDC invested sixteen million dollars ($250,000,000 today) in the resettlement program in Russia.[[125: American Jewish Yearbook, 1939–40.]] If they had diverted even ten to twenty percent of those funds, it would have alleviated the financial stress of many families, mitigated hunger, enabled them to observe tradition, and greatly expanded the number of children receiving Jewish education. When the Rebbe arrived in the US, he discovered indifference to the plight of Russian Jews. “The attitude here to Russian Jewry is hopelessness and coldness from both the JDC and Agudas Harabonim (Union of Orthodox Rabbis); even public opinion here was not in favor of assisting our brethren in Russia.”[[126: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Rabbi Mendel Rothstein dated 28 Shevat, 5690 (February 24, 1930).]] He wrote to Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz[[127: Igrot Kodesh 11:108, letter to Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz dated 2 Adar, 5690 (March 2, 1930). The Rebbe expresses great disappointment over the repeated broken promises.]] that he was deeply disappointed after his first few months in the US. “I trusted naively the words of Dr. Rosen [in Riga] that the JDC would help.” The crash of Wall Street had an adverse impact, and the Rebbe’s visit to Philadelphia had not yielded much support, but the Rebbe remained undeterred. “We must break down the wall [of indifference],” he told Rabinowitz. “The condition of Russian Jewy is very grave.”[[128: Ibid.]] Eventually, he sensed a slight shift in public sentiment. “After months of being here, the public is waking up slightly and is beginning to feel that something must be done.”[[129: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter to Rabbi Mendel Rothstein dated 28 Shevat, 5690 (February 24, 1930).]] He hoped to capitalize on this awareness by creating a new coalition of major Jewish groups. In late January 1930, the Rebbe met with Justice Louis Brandeis in Washington and asked him to spearhead an effort to convince the major Jewish groups in the US to help Soviet Jews. They discussed creating a community-wide alliance to be organized on many levels. He proposed that the JDC coordinate the agricultural colonies while others facilitate emigration and back efforts to sustain religious life. The Rebbe felt this broad-based coalition should include Felix Warburg, Stephen S. Wise, and Cyrus Adler, with Brandeis as chair. “Rabbi Schneersohn impressed me so much,”[[130: Igrot Kodesh 11:115, letter from Justice Louis Brandeis to Israel Thurman dated March 9, 1930. Israel Thurman (1884–1982) was a brother-in-law of Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz, a follower of Chabad. He graduated from Harvard and was a leader in the Reform movement and the American Jewish Congress. He was a close friend of Brandeis, who addressed him in a letter as “My dear Thurman.”]] wrote Brandeis after the meeting. The Rebbe had hoped he would take a public leadership role, but Brandeis limited himself to working behind the scenes, trying to orchestrate others to lead the coalition. Brandeis enlisted the help of David Bressler, a prominent leader of the American Jewish Committee who became vice chair of the JDC. Bressler attempted to create a joint initiative of the American Jewish Committee, the American Jewish Congress, and the JDC.[[131: Letter from Israel Thurman to the Rebbe dated March 11, 1930. In the letter, Thurman details the efforts to create a unified communal initiative to support the Rebbe’s work in Russia. This is especially noteworthy because the American Jewish Committee, which represented the secular German Jewish leaders and which did not actively endorse Zionism, and the American Jewish Congress, which was made up of grassroots traditional Jews who supported Zionism, were at times at odds with each other. Still, according to Thurman, they actively discussing the proposal to create a joint effort with the JDC.]] Sadly, this proposal floundered – though perhaps it could have succeeded if Brandeis had stood at the public helm of the initiative.[[132: The Rebbe asked Thurman to encourage Stephen S. Wise to travel with him to Washington to try to influence Brandeis to take a more public role. Igrot Kodesh 11:115.]] While sympathetic to the Rebbe, he felt that his “judicial duties and other limitations precluded me from doing more.”[[133: Ibid.]] With the lack of support from the JDC and other establishment groups, the Rebbe was left a solitary soldier on the field. He singlehandedly tried to marshal support to sustain Judaism under the oppressive Russian regime. He was careful never to criticize the JDC publicly, but the Rebbe’s fundraising initiatives outside their framework still exacerbated tensions with them. He had arrived in the US to a hero’s welcome, lauded as the rabbi who had stood up to the Soviets and escaped a death sentence. As one Jewish newspaper put it, “The Lubavitcher Rebbe is the ambassador of the two million Jews of Soviet Russia. Their suffering is his suffering. The Rebbe is a personification of self-sacrifice; his heroic battle in defense of Judaism in the Soviet Union evoked a storm around the world.”[[134: The Jewish Record, May 2, 1930.]] Until this point, the JDC had been the dominant organization on issues of Russian Jews. Now, another voice with great credibility challenged that hegemony.[[135: This attitude persisted. When Professor Cyrus Adler wanted to help the Rebbe personally, he wrote to Joseph Hyman, the JDC director. “I have signed a letter to Rabbi Schneersohn; if you do not consider it objectionable from the point of view of the JDC, please let it go. You will notice I have written it on Dropsie College paper.” Letter from Adler to Hyman dated February 2, 1932, JDC Archives.]] Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson writes in his memoirs, “JDC leaders did not want the Rebbe to connect with prominent philanthropists in the US because they recognized that he would have great influence. They tried to deter potential donors from participating in the Rebbe’s fundraising events for Russian Jewry.”[[136: Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, 184.]] The Rebbe was also careful not to criticize the Russian government publicly,[[137: At times, the Rebbe even lauded the Communists. During a visit to Baltimore in January 1930, the Rashag, acting as the Rebbe’s spokesman, said, “Religious Jews in Russia are grateful to the Soviets because the government has consistently repressed anti-Jewish pogroms” (The Baltimore Sun, January 13, 1930). However, in the same article, the Rashag is quoted as saying, “The economic status of the religious Jew in Russia is deplorable.” The article also detailed the Rebbe’s arrest and release due to international pressure, and noted that the “policy and legislation of the Soviet government is anti-religious.”]] or even to detail the oppression of Russian Jews. Rabbi Yosef Landa notes, “During the Rebbe’s visit to St. Louis, there is no harsh rhetoric condemning the Communist paradise or its leaders, no mention of arrests, exiles to Siberian labor camps, or executions.”[[138: Yosef Landa, “The Historic Visit by the Sixth Rebbe of Chabad to St. Louis,” available at: chabad.org/3715920.]] The situation in Russia was one of life and death, and public controversy could provoke retaliation against Chasidim by the Russian government. As The Jewish Record wrote, “The time is not ripe to disclose publicly[[139: This discreet approach was continued by the seventh Rebbe until the fall of the Soviet Union. He strongly opposed the public demonstrations that were covertly orchestrated by Israeli Secret Service division Lishkat Hakesher. He asserted that public pressure and intimidation would only cause the Russian government to double down on its policies and be more resistant to permitting Russian Jews to emigrate. Eli Rubin, “Soviet Jewry: Quiet Diplomacy, Covert Activity,” available at: chabad.org/2619818.]] all that the Lubavitcher Rebbe has done and continues to do on behalf of the Jews of Russia.”[[140: May 9, 1930.]] Shortly after arriving in the US, the Rebbe began visiting the various Jewish communities in the country, beginning with Philadelphia and Baltimore. In Philadelphia, the Rebbe visited Independence Hall, where he was honored with an invitation to sit in the chair of George Washington. “I wanted to see the cradle of American democracy,” he said. There he praised the American Constitution and the freedoms that were given to citizens in the US. He expressed his appreciation of the US government, saying, “It has always been supportive of us [the Jewish people] even when other major powers were not.”[[141: The Yiddish Velt, December 16, 1929 (14 Kislev, 5690); Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit, chap. 14.]] The Rebbe echoed this theme of gratitude for American freedoms throughout his US visit. The Rebbe visited major Jewish communities in Milwaukee, Detroit, and Boston, staying in each for about a week. He spent three months in Chicago, where there was a large Chabad community. He made shorter stops in Springfield and Worcester, Massachusetts, and in other areas of New York such as the Bronx. The furthest western city that the Rebbe visited was St. Louis. He arrived there on Sunday, May 4, and stayed for ten days. In every city, the Rebbe was welcomed by crowds of thousands thronging the train stations. The Yiddish daily The Jewish Record displayed a six-column banner headline over the front page announcing his reception in St. Louis. “Such a large crowd consisting of thousands of men, women, and children has never been witnessed at any reception accorded to a Jewish leader visiting our city.”[[142: The Jewish Record, May 9, 1930.]] The Detroit Free Press reported that when the Rebbe arrived there, “thousands thronged the lobby of Michigan Central Station and overflowed the streets.”[[143: Detroit Free Press, April 28, 1930.]] From the train station, a procession of “more than ten thousand escorted the Rebbe to the Emanual Synagogue” in Detroit’s Jewish neighborhood. Chicago’s Morning Journal described how a boisterous crowd of “fifteen thousand welcomed the Lubavitcher Rebbe in LaSalle Street Station.”[[144: February 10, 1930.]] The Chicago Courier noted that the crowds were comprised of “old and young, men and women.”[[145: Chicago Courier, February 11, 1930, reprinted in Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit, 67.]] It took police half an hour to make a path for the Rebbe and his entourage to exit, after which, wrote the Morning Journal, “a large parade of hundreds of cars accompanied the Rebbe.” The American Jewish community included many Eastern European immigrants who had a great respect for chasidic Rebbes and distinguished rabbinic scholars. The Rebbe was admired for fearlessly standing up to the Russians, and he was respected for his piousness as a chasidic Rebbe. That, together with his genuine concern for all Jews regardless of their background, made the Rebbe a figure greatly adored. But the Rebbe himself was distressed by the honors bestowed on him. On the day of his arrival in a city where he would invariably be greeted by large crowds, he would fast, seeking spiritual refinement.[[146: Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, 181. Jacobson notes that the Rebbe lost weight during these visits.]] As he remarked to one of his close Chasidim, Rabbi Nissan Telushkin, “Honor should cause you to diminish yourself.” In each city there would be banquets, major speaking events, and receptions. Late one night, after one of these gala dinners, the Rebbe wrote to his wife, “It’s midnight. I just came from a banquet, I must say to you with a heavy heart. Every time I am at a banquet arranged in my honor, it brings a very vochedik [Yiddish: mundane] feeling.…I don’t feel good or comfortable, not from the speeches which I listen to, nor from the rousing ovations which are made for me or the praises and the falsehoods which are spoken.”[[147: Letter dated May 11, 1930.]] While thousands turned out to welcome the Rebbe, in some cities the Jewish establishment stayed away. In St. Louis, The Jewish Record[[148: The Jewish Record, lead editorial, May 16, 1930.]] editorialized about the lack of support from Jewish Federation leaders, explaining that traditional Jews, mostly immigrants, had always feared making a move “without the approval of the community establishment.” The Rebbe’s visit was a moment of empowerment, a “demonstration on the part of the Jewish masses that Yiddishkeit (traditional Judaism) is not lost, that the roots are healthy, even if the branches have broken off.” It went on to explain the reality of the Jewish immigrants, “ordinary Jews, whose hearts throb with a strong burning love to all that is Jewish,” even though some had drifted from full observance. This underscored a great schism. On one side were the suave Americanized Jews, whose origins lay in the nineteenth-century immigration from Germany. They dominated Jewish life and tended to be connected to the Reform movement, which was much less religiously observant. On the other side were the traditional European Jews, who started arriving in mass numbers much later and still felt tethered to tradition, continuing to speak Yiddish even after they settled into life in America. The paper labeled the visit a “victory for the grassroots Jews.” At each stop, the Rebbe would utilize every opportunity to inspire the local community to increase its level of observance. During his visit to St. Louis, a group of women raised concerns about the city’s run-down mikveh. When the Rebbe entered the large sanctuary of Shaare Tzedek Synagogue, he heard a loud noise. “The Rebbe looked around, searching for the source of the commotion,” says Faye Zeffren. She and other women were banging on the benches, hoping to get the Rebbe’s attention. “The women called out that there was a dire need for a new mikveh and appealed to the Rebbe for help.” Tired of the inaction of local leaders, they hoped the Rebbe would intervene. The Rebbe met with the women, including Zeffren,[[149: Faye Zeffren recalls that when the women met with the Rebbe, he reminded them that although according to Jewish law, nail polish must be removed before immersing in a mikveh, women were encouraged to reapply nail polish and makeup after immersion. “It is important for Jewish women to look good,” she recalls the Rebbe saying. Yosef Landa, “The Historic Visit by the Sixth Rebbe of Chabad to St. Louis,” available at: chabad.org/3715920.]] suggesting they form a committee to oversee the construction of a new mikveh. He encouraged local leaders to make the project a priority. Within days, advertisements appeared in the local Jewish press for a fundraising dinner in support of the new mikveh; the dinner was held a week later.[[150: At the dinner, held on May 18, 1930 at Congregation B’nai Amoona, the plans for the new mikveh were unveiled. Each attendee was given a card with a picture of the Rebbe and a coin the Rebbe had given for supporters of the mikveh.]] The Rebbe gave the committee a gift of coins to distribute to anyone who contributed to the mikveh that was built shortly afterward. Even after returning to Europe, the Rebbe kept in contact with the mikveh committee. During the Detroit portion of the Rebbe’s visit,[[151: The Rebbe visited Detroit from April 27 to May 4, 1930. On April 28, the Detroit Evening Times reported, “More than ten thousand persons thronged the Michigan Central Railroad Station…to welcome Rabbi Schneersohn, world leader of Chasidim and head of Orthodox Jewry. A police escort was called to conduct the Lubavitcher Rebbe to his car.”]] Isadore Starr,[[152: “If the Rebbe Comes to America, America Will Come to Him!” available at: https://anash.org/if-the-rebbe-comes-to-america-america-will-come-to-him/.]] who came from a Chabad family, was asked to serve as translator. He later wrote that hundreds came to meet the Rebbe. “Some just wanted the honor of seeing and speaking to him. Others had various problems for which they wished to receive the Rebbe’s blessing and advice.” Starr recalls one woman whose son was ill and requested that the Rebbe “tell her son to recover and be well.” Starr was struck with the Rebbe’s compassion. “He received her with kindness, sympathy, and exercised a great deal of patience.” He finally told her that he was not a “miracle worker,” but his ancestors were tzaddikim (saintly Jews), and he would pray for them to intercede on high for her. One individual said he would make a major donation to the Rebbe if he would visit him in his home. Starr says the Rebbe demurred, saying “he could not accept the offer, as there were many people of lesser wealth who perhaps were much more deserving and more entitled to a visit.” At one point the Rebbe made an unannounced visit to a local Chabad synagogue. The Rebbe began to talk about “the economic conditions and the deplorable fact that people who were willing to work could not find employment.” The congregants were surprised by the Rebbe’s grasp of the situation in the wake of the Wall Street crash. He reassured them, “Do not despair. G-d will help, and America will return to prosperity.” During that visit the Rebbe also encouraged the synagogue members to set aside time for Torah study. He added that it was important to preserve a sense of community, “to maintain a friendship and friendly spirit between each other, as that too is worshiping G-d. It is the mitzvah of ve’ahavta lerei’akha kamokha (loving your fellow Jew), a cardinal principle of the Torah.” Lewis Boxer,[[153: Lewis Boxer (1904–90) was a resident of Philadelphia. In the decades that followed his meeting with the Rebbe, he remained connected to Chabad and supported its work in his city. His article describing the encounter appeared in The Jewish Press.]] then twenty-five years old, had heard about the Rebbe’s arrival in Philadelphia, where he was welcomed by large crowds.[[154: The Rebbe spent a month in Philadelphia, arriving December 15, 1929. Local newspapers covered his arrival avidly; the Rebbe was greeted by crowds of thousands. See Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit, chap. 14.]] Boxer was intrigued by all the public attention.[[155: Local Jewish philanthropists Nathan and Jennie Faggen hosted a major fundraising dinner to benefit the Rebbe’s institutions, raising over fifteen thousand dollars (more than $250,000 today) despite the stock market crash two months earlier. See Dovi Safier, “Mother of all Yeshivos: Uncovering the Forgotten Legacy of Mrs. Jennie Miller Faggen,” Mishpacha, issue no. 956, April 3, 2023.]] “My friends and I read these articles and wondered whether the Rebbe was actually planning to replace the Almighty. We discussed this with an official of our synagogue, and he suggested that we visit the Rebbe and ask him what he had in mind.” Late Saturday night, Boxer and his friends piled into a car and headed to the home where the Rebbe was staying. Through the window, they saw the house was crowded with men. “We rang the doorbell,” Boxer says, “and a dignified, bearded man came to the door and inquired what we wanted. One of us responded, ‘We’d like to speak to the Rebbe. We have an important question to ask.’” The man, taking notes, told them the Rebbe needed to know the question before he could see them. “We’d like to know how he expects us to keep an old-fashioned religion in a modern country,” the young man said. They were told they would have to wait behind the crowd of people who came before them. Just a few minutes later, the group was called in, bypassing the crowds. “We wondered why we had been admitted before all those people downstairs who had been there before us,” Boxer said. At the top of the stairs, they found the Rebbe waiting for them. “He was tall, handsome, with gleamin bright eyes. He wore a large fur hat. His hand was outstretched in greeting.” The Rebbe surprised them by saying, “This is the happiest moment I’ve had in Philadelphia,” and started to arrange chairs for them around his desk. The young group wanted to help him, but he insisted on doing this task himself. They sat down, facing the Rebbe, who took a long look at each one of them and said: You look like very intelligent young men, and therefore I must speak on your level. You are wondering about those people downstairs who were here before you. Well, here are some of the problems for which they are asking for help. One man’s daughter is seriously ill. What can I do? Nothing more than he can do, provided he approaches G-d. He should be able to ask for a complete recovery. Another has a lawsuit and wants me to pray that he will win. I do not know who’s right, but he can pray that G-d will give justice. There’s a man who wants to buy a business and wants me to intercede to make sure it succeeds. If I could do that, I’d be a rich businessman. But if I could not answer your question, I’d have no right to be a rabbi. First, I must admit a great secret which you will most likely keep. There are 613 mitzvot; while the Lubavitcher Rebbe tries to keep them all, he finds it impossible to keep them all. So what does he do? Discard 613 mitzvot? No, he keeps as many of them as humanly possible.” The Rebbe’s words touched the young men deeply. “With these few sentences, he removed the venom we had brought with us,” says Boxer. “Then he asked us to try and keep as many mitzvot as we could. If we did, then we’d be doing the same thing as the Lubavitcher Rebbe!” The Rebbe then asked for their Jewish names and the names of their mothers. “Several of the boys put their hands in their pockets, but he stopped them with a gesture, thanked them, and said he had no use for money. He wanted mitzvot – he asked us whether we donned tefillin every day.” Several admitted they had given it up. He offered them tefillin so they could fulfill the mitzvah. “All of us promised to try to live up to his suggestions. He then blessed us individually, shook hands again, and we left.” The conversation made a profound impression on the group. “We stood on the porch for nearly two hours digesting the visit. Everyone agreed to pray at least once a day. One said he would give up his Saturday work as a dental technician, and some months later he even prevailed upon his employer to do the same.” One member of the group, “Gabriel Lowenthal, of blessed memory, attached himself to a synagogue and taught what he had learned from the Rebbe’s philosophy to many others.” Decades later, Boxer wrote, “the ten minutes we spent with the Rebbe strengthened the spirit of Judaism in all of us.” It wasn’t only young people. The Rebbe also challenged rabbis and community leaders. During the three months the Rebbe spent in Chicago, a prominent local Jewish scholar, Rabbi Nachman Bar,[[156: Upon immigrating to the US, Rabbi Bar lived in St. Paul, Minnesota. He moved to Chicago in 1925, teaching in the yeshivah until 1947.]] went to meet with him.[[157: Interview with Benjamin Katz, JEM Oral History Project.]] Rabbi Bar had been a star student in the Mirrer yeshivah in Europe, immigrating to the US in 1917. By the time the Rebbe visited Chicago in 1930, Rabbi Bar was the rosh yeshivah at Chicago’s Hebrew Theological College.[[158: Hebrew Theological College/Beis HaMidrash LaTorah was founded in 1919 and remains a major center of Jewish learning to this day. For more information, see www.htc.edu.]] The Rebbe asked him a seemingly simple question in Yiddish: “Vost tut eir – What do you do?” He responded he was a rosh yeshivah and that he taught Talmud. The Rebbe repeated the question. Thinking that the Rebbe must be hearing impaired, Rabbi Bar said again, “I am a rosh yeshivah.” The Rebbe looked at him and repeated the question in Yiddish for the third time. Rabbi Bar yelled back in Yiddish, “Ich Reb Nachman Bar, rosh yeshivah fun Beis Midrash LeTorah,” adding that he taught boys the classic talmudic tractates to prepare them for ordination. Finally, the Rebbe said to him, “I heard you the first time, and I know you are a dedicated teacher and that this is your job, but my question is, what are you doing to uplift Judaism in Chicago?” Rabbi Bar was surprised, later telling Chicago’s Chabad leader, Yosef Katz, “I had never heard a person talk that way to anyone.” Confused, he wondered if he should leave immediately or if he should attempt to answer the Rebbe. Then he realized the Rebbe would provide the answer, and he asked, “Vus zul itch ton – What should I do?” The Rebbe answered his own question: “I want you to gather all the men and boys who never reach the doorknob of your yeshivah, and I want you to teach them the parashah (portion) of the week seasoned with interesting midrashim (rabbinic commentaries).” The Rebbe added two caveats: “Never mention that I suggested this idea, and don’t teach it in your yeshivah.” Rabbi Bar assured the Rebbe, “I will try to do this.” He began teaching a weekly class at Congregation Adas B’nei Israel, attracting large crowds. In 1946, Katz was traveling to visit the Rebbe in New York, and Rabbi Bar asked him to give a message to the Rebbe: “I have been teaching the parashah class for sixteen years, and it has been very successful. I have not become a Chasid of the Rebbe, but I am following his instructions.” The Rebbe challenged the mindset prevalent at the time in which being a good Jew was redefined as living an ethical life and being a good citizen.[[159: The Pittsburgh Platform, an 1885 document listing the founding principles of the US Reform movement, repudiated classic Jewish beliefs, the divinity of the Torah, and the obligation to observe mitzvot. The Conservative movement, which began as a reaction to the Reform movement moving away from historic Jewish beliefs, was itself beginning to struggle with the same ideas. While still tethered to tradition to a degree, it also advocated for the centrality of ethics and slowly deemphasized the observance of commandments.]] In a maamar that the Rebbe presented in Baltimore[[160: The Rebbe spent three weeks in Baltimore, starting January 12, 1930. As in other cities, he was welcomed by a large crowd – it numbered three thousand, according to The Baltimore Sun. During his visit, he was presented with the key to the city by the mayor, and he met with Maryland’s governor, Albert Richie.]] to a crowd of close to 1,500, he questioned this new ideology. The Rebbe underscored that the foundational key to Judaism was the mitzvah, the performance of an actual commandment. “This is the reason for their error, in that they argue against closeness to godliness through practical mitzvot, yet they admit the closeness by the way of the service of heart.” He was alluding to the theology emphasizing ethical ideas rather than observance of mitzvot. The Rebbe explained, “The key to connecting with the Divine is through fulfilling the commandments. One comes close to godliness though the practical mitzvot, with physical actions.” Rabbi Shmuel Kaplan, today a Chabad shliach in Baltimore, explains, “The new liberal philosophy rejected the observance of mitzvot, saying that the primary principle is ethics, not how we live on a daily basis.” He argues that “this is the underlying failure of American Jewry. Judaism rooted in theoretical ethical ideas, instead of real action, has proven to be unsustainable.” Prior to returning to Europe, the Rebbe made a second trip to Washington, where he was received by President Herbert Hoover at the White House.[[161: “Lubawitscher Rebbe Received at White House by President,” JTA, July 13, 1930, available at: https://www.jta.org/1930/07/13/archive/lubawitscher-rebbe-received-at-white-house-by-president. The Rashag also thanked the president for his support of Jews in Eretz Yisrael.]] The Rebbe wrote to his family that he had not planned to visit the president, but at the last minute he was invited and made the trip.[[162: Sefer HaSichos, letter dated 14 Tamuz, 5688 ( July 12, 1930), 105.]] He was accompanied by Rabbis Moshe Kramer and Chaim Fogelman, the chair and vice chair of Agudas Chassidei Chabad, and Asher Rabinowitz,[[163: Asher was the son of Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz of Boston. He had lobbied Justice Brandeis to encourage the US government to protest when the Rebbe was arrested in 1927 (see chap. 6). He would also play an instrumental role lobbying the US government to intervene to save the Rebbe in war-torn Poland (see chap. 9).]] who served as the translator. The Rebbe saw the visit as an opportunity to express appreciation for the freedoms granted to American Jews and for the American government’s assistance to Jews living overseas. Afterward, the Rebbe told his family in a letter that he was happy they met and that he felt it was a productive meeting. After the visit to Washington, the Rebbe prepared to return to Europe. He had accomplished some of his objectives during his long sojourn in the US, but others remained elusive. His goal of raising funds was marginally successful, but some of the money was lost in a bank failure. As for the JDC, he had hoped that meeting with its leaders would inspire them to support his religious education network in Russia. While many were sympathetic, like Cyrus Adler, even offering personal support, JDC chair Felix Warburg remained opposed to funding the network.[[164: The JDC’s response changed in the years that followed. In the 1930s, it supported the network of yeshivas that the Rebbe developed in Poland, and in the postwar era, it actively assisted Chabad refugees who escaped Russia. Starting in the 1950s, it partnered with Chabad to support school systems in Morocco and Tunisia. It also supported Chabad projects in Europe and Israel. Today, the JDC works with Chabad in the Former Soviet Union.]] These setbacks did not put a dent in the Rebbe’s spirit. He continued to forge ahead, impervious to obstacles thrown in his path. As for his second goal, the visit reinforced the bond between the Rebbe and the Chasidim in the US, who were saddened by his departure. They hoped that he would consider their proposal to relocate to the US. After the Rebbe returned to Europe, the American Chasidim expanded Agudas Chassidei Chabad, the national Chabad organization. They began working to increase the study of chasidic teachings. Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson, for example, began teaching chasidic philosophy to students in the New York yeshivas. This drew them closer to the chasidic worldview,[[165: Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, chap. 29–30.]] and some of them eventually traveled to Poland to study in the Rebbe’s yeshivah in Otwock. The connection between the American Chasidim and the Rebbe was also invigorated by emissaries the Rebbe sent to America. Outstanding Chasidim such as Rabbi Itche “der masmid” Gurewicz (literally, “the avid student”)[[166: Rabbi Gurewicz was renowned for his commitment to learning and scholarship. He served as an emissary of both the Rebbe Rashab and the Rebbe Rayatz. He was burned alive by the Nazis in the synagogue of Kherson, Ukraine, in November 1941.]] and Rabbi Shmuel Levitin,[[167: Rabbi Shmuel Levitin (1883–1974) was sent by the Rebbe in 1938 and remained in the US, unable to return to Europe due to the war. He was a prominent scholar and a devoted Chasid who played a key leadership role in the US Chabad community until his passing. “Shmuel Levitin, 91, Lubavitcher Figure,” The New York Times, Aug. 31, 1974, available at: https://www.nytimes.com/1974/08/31/archives/shmuel-levitin-91-lubavitcher-figure.html.]] both exceptional role models of scholarship and piety, were sent by the Rebbe to visit the US to inspire the community there. They and others the Rebbe sent taught chasidic philosophy, led farbrengens, and galvanized support for the Rebbe’s yeshivah system in Poland and his underground network in Russia. They became an active bridge between the Rebbe in Europe and his followers in the US. The Rebbe’s third goal for his trip to America was to invigorate Judaism there. Throughout the visit, he encouraged Jews he encountered to increase their observance. He seized every opportunity to stress the importance of Jewish education. His sense of optimism was infectious, and his visit was deeply inspirational for thousands who came in contact with him. During the ten months the Rebbe traveled throughout America, he gained a keen understanding of the state of US Jewry. The visit led the Rebbe to adopt a different perspective on its future than the predominant view among other great European Torah scholars, who held little hope for American Jewry. The Rebbe regarded the enthusiasm that greeted him and his ideas as a reason for optimism. While in St. Louis, the Rebbe told a reporter from The Jewish Record,[[168: The Jewish Record, May 16, 1930.]] “I am not pessimistic like other European Jews who visit America.” Rather, the Rebbe saw great potential in the US, saying, “American youth possess a deep religious feeling.” Later, in Latvia, the Rebbe reflected on his US visit. “The Jewish youth of Europe excel with the mind,” he said, referring to the high level of Jewish scholarship in Europe, but “the youth in America excel in the realm of heart because they are openminded and receptive to Torah.” In the last major farbrengen that the Rebbe held before departing the US, marking his fiftieth birthday and the anniversary of his release from Communist prison three years earlier, the Rebbe said, “The unpretentious American youth are full of wonderful potential. They can be educated and inspired.” Prior to leaving, the Rebbe did an extensive interview with New York’s Der Morgen Journal,[[169: Der Morgen Journal, July 16, 1930, reprinted in “America Is No Different: A Selection of Vintage Film Clips of Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak of Lubavitch in the United States,” JEM, 1999.]] in which he stated that American youth pine and thirst for religion and lack only knowledge and education. “All the raw materials, all the components of the grand Jewish edifice, are already here in the US,” he said. He told the reporter that American Jews would not only support the Jewish infrastructure in Europe, they would also build Torah centers in the US and “have institutions here.” A large crowd gathered on the pier on the day of the Rebbe’s departure.[[170: July 16, 1930 (20 Tamuz, 5690).]] There he proclaimed a new vision for American Jewry,[[171: Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, 185; Sefer HaSichos, 5688–91 (2021 edition), 72.]] saying it was time for them to redefine their role. “Until this point, you were in the role of givers, and with an open hand you endeavored to support Torah institutions in Europe. But now, “you also have to become takers. You have to adapt from the Torah centers of Europe the approach of disseminating Jewish learning and strengthening Judaism, and institute it in America.” He challenged the crowd to transform the US into what few imagined possible at the time: “Make America a place of Torah.”[[172: Kovetz Lubavitch, year 2 (5705), 74–75; Sefer HaSichos, 5688–91, 133.]] A week later the ship docked in Bremen, Germany.[[173: Wednesday, 27 Tamuz, 5690 ( July 23, 1930).]] For the Rebbe it had been a long, exhausting trip. He traveled to Berlin accompanied by his daughter Chaya Mushka and son-in-law the Ramash. The doctors had ordered the Rebbe to rest from the taxing journey, and he went to the spa at Marienbad. “I was very weak from travel and stayed there for three weeks,” the Rebbe wrote.[[174: Igrot Kodesh 2:256, 11:143.]] After recuperating, he felt a marked improvement and finally headed home to Riga,[[175: The Rebbe arrived on Sunday, 14 Elul, 5690 (September 8, 1930).]] arriving a little more than thirteen months after his departure.[[176: Vilner Radio, September 14, 1930: “A few days ago, the Rebbe of Lubavitch returned to Riga from America, where he spent almost a year”; Frimorgen Journal, September 18, 1930.]] In Riga, the train station was packed with well-wishers waiting to greet the Rebbe. As soon as the train pulled in, a loud welcome of “Baruch haba” reverberated in the air. The crowds were so thick that the passengers could not depart from the train. The police created a corridor, and the Rebbe’s entourage navigated between rows of uniformed officers, finally entering two cars that waited outside the station. The celebration continued later in the Rebbe’s large apartment, where many Chasidim gathered. Two weeks later, the Rebbe celebrated the High Holidays in Riga. Joyful at the Rebbe’s return, Chasidim from nearby Poland and Lithuania flocked to join him. Even many local Jews who were not so observant participated in the festivities. After the holidays, the Rebbe faced many questions about his next steps after the yearlong trip abroad. Those choices would set the destiny of Chabad for years to come.

