Amid the darkness of oppression and displacement, a ray of hope and joy emerged. A year after the Rebbe departed from Russia, his second daughter, Chaya Mushka, was finally to be wed to the Ramash. The “royal wedding,” as historian Rabbi Dr. Aaron Rakeffet labeled it,[[1: “The Royal Wedding,” Rabbi Dr. Aaron Rakeffet, available at: https://www.yutorah.org/lectures/834665/Jewish-History-#24-%E2%80%93-.]] would be held in Warsaw, Poland, in the fall of 1929. The celebration heralded a new era of Chabad, exiled from its birthplace in Russia and now being reborn in Western Europe, resilient, buoyant, and revitalized. This was not the first wedding the Rebbe had hosted. His older daughter Chana had married Rabbi Shmaryahu Gurary in June 1921[[2: Sivan 5681 ( June 17, 1921).]] in Rostov.
At the time, a typhus epidemic had devastated the chasidic community, and famine ravaged Rostov. The yeshivah was forcibly closed by the Yevesektzia, and the Rebbe was being harassed by the authorities. Before Chana’s wedding, the secret police broke into the Rebbe’s home, seizing much of his property, including the wedding dress. With limited financial resources, the celebration was very modest. Zalman Gurary attended, writing in his memoir, “The famine was so acute that all that was served to the guests at the wedding were light refreshments of cake and drinks.”[[3: Rabbi Zalman Gurary, BeKhol Beiti Ne’eman Hu (Kfar Chabad Israel, 2009), 25–26.]]
Four years after Chaya Mushka’s wedding, in 1932, the Rebbe’s youngest daughter, Sheina, married Rabbi Mendel Horenstein in the city of Landwarow,[[4: At the time, Landwarow was under Polish rule. Today the city is known as Lentvaris and is located some fifteen miles from Vilnius in Lithuania.]] Poland, just over the border, not far from Vilnius.[[5: The Rebbe wrote in 1938 that they chose this city for the wedding location because of visa issues. See Igrot Kodesh 4:370. Rabbi Zalman Gurary remembers sleeping on a bench in a local synagogue because all accommodations had been taken by Chasidim visiting for the wedding. Gurary, BeKhol Beiti Ne’eman Hu, 67.]] Rabbi Chaim Ozer Grodzinski officiated,[[6: Also participating in the wedding were several noted scholars, including Rabbi Baruch Ber Leibowitz, rosh yeshivah of the Kaminetz Yeshivah. JEM Oral History Project interview with Mottel Sharfstein, who heard this from Rabbi Baruch Ber’s student Rabbi Yudel Gershoni. He recalled that at the wedding, he and Rabbi Baruch Ber had a scholarly discussion with the Ramash. Gershoni told Sharfstein, “He had knowledge of everything in Shas (the Talmud).”]] and many Chasidim traveled to join the wedding celebrations. Horenstein’s father was an uncle of the Rebbe. He was a successful businessman who operated a Jewish orphanage. Sophisticated and worldly, he sent his son to a gymnasium, a secular-style high school, giving him a broader education than most children from Chabad families. Mendel grew closer to his father-in-law, the Rebbe, slowly strengthening his chasidic tradition. After the wedding, the couple moved to Paris, and a few months later, Chaya Mushka and her husband, the Ramash, joined them. Rabbi Mendel and the Ramash studied together regularly.
With the outbreak of war, the young Horensteins and their adopted son traveled to Otwock to care for Rabbi Mendel’s aging parents. Eventually they were all captured by the Nazis. Their fate was unknown for years, until finally it was revealed that the whole family was killed in Treblinka.[[7: Sheina was killed on the second day of Rosh HaShanah 5703 (September 13, 1942) and Rabbi Mendel was killed almost two months later, on 25 Marcheshvan, 5703 (November 5, 1942). Their nephew Yaakov Yosef Liss (the son of Mendel’s sister Sara), whom they adopted, was also killed by the Nazis in 1942. (The couple adopted Yaakov Yosef when his mother died a few days after giving birth to her second child.) In 1950, the seventh Rebbe wrote that he received information from a Treblinka survivor who described the details of their fate. Elkanah Shmotkin, Rebbetzin Sheina Horenstein: A Brief Biography (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2021).]]
The engagement of Chaya Mushka and the Ramash had been unusually lengthy. The young couple met for the first time in the summer of 1923 in the Russian city resort town of Kislovodsk. The Rebbe and his family were in the summer resort in the foothills of the Caucasus, some three hundred miles south of Rostov. The idea for the match was originally suggested by the Rebbe Rashab[[8: The Ramash and the Rebbe Rashab never met. The Ramash’s younger years were a period of great disruption, first by war and later by the Russian revolution. Travel from Ukraine to Lubavitch and later Rostov was very difficult and even dangerous. The seventh Rebbe once remarked to his secretary Rabbi Leibel Groner, “I never met the Rashab, so I did not have the difficulty of shifting my allegiance from one Rebbe to another.” He was alluding to the challenge that some Chasidim face when they are close followers of one Rebbe and then need to attach themselves to his successor after his demise. Reb Leibel Groner, The Mazkir: The Rebbe’s Personal Secretary (Malchut HaKeter, Israel), vol. 1.]] years earlier. While discussing with his wife the subject of potential grooms for their granddaughter, he had remarked, “We should think of Reb Levik’s son,”[[9: Zalman Duchman, LeSheima Ozen.]] referring to the Rashab’s cousin, Rabbi Levi Yitzchak Schneerson, chief rabbi of Yekaterinoslav, the Ramash’s father.
That summer of 5683 (1923), before the two met, the Rebbe confided to Rabbi Eliyahu Chaim Althaus that he wished to marry off his “precious, beloved daughter Chaya Mushka to Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson.”[[10: Letter from Althaus to the Rebbe dated 24 Tishrei, 5690, quoted in Boruch Oberlander and Elkanah Shmotkin, Early Years: The Formative Years of the Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson (Kehot Publication Society), 112.]] The Rebbe asked Althaus to act as the formal shadkhan (matchmaker) to suggest the match to the Ramash’s family and introduce the couple. Althaus escorted twenty-one-year-old Menachem Mendel on the six-hundred-mile trip from his hometown of Yekaterinoslav (today known as Dinipo) to the resort town of Kislovodsk, where the couple met for the first time.[[11: They met on 17 Tamuz, 5683 ( July 1, 1923). Oberlander and Shmotkin, Early Years, chap. 2.]] After two weeks there, the Ramash returned to Rostov with the Rebbe, while the Rebbe’s family, including Chaya Mushka, remained in Kislovodsk. A week later, the Rebbe wrote to Chaya Mushka, “My daughter, this week I studied deeply ‘Hilkhot Mendel’ (the subject of Mendel), may he be well, for several hours each day.”[[12: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 15, letter dated Erev Shabbat Parshat Pinchas, 23 Tamuz, 5683 ( July 7, 1923). This was not the first visit of the Ramash to the Rebbe. He had traveled to Rostov and met the Rebbe for the first time on Sukkot 1923. See Rabbi Zalman Hertzl, Nisuei HaNesi’im, vol. 2, 3rd edition (Brooklyn, NY: 2016), 22, footnote 26.]] He went on to say that the visit was very friendly. Alluding to the meeting that the Ramash had with Chaya Mushka, the Rebbe wrote, “He left with a pleasant impression of the Caucasus. He would like to have another excursion in the mountains,” hinting that he would like to see her again.
But the progress of the match was slowed by geography – the Ramash was living with his parents in Yekaterinoslav, distant from Rostov – as well as political instability, financial constraints, and the constant oppression of the Rebbe at the hands of the Yevesektzia. In May 1924, the Rebbe moved from Rostov to Leningrad,[[13: St. Petersburg was renamed Leningrad after the death of Lenin in January 1924.]] or as he described it, “I was compelled to leave by the order of the political police.”[[14: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 13, letter dated 19 Tamuz, 5700 ( July 24, 1940).]] His family followed shortly thereafter. The Ramash visited Leningrad regularly, also attending classes at the local university.[[15: For more details on the Ramash’s time in Leningrad, see Oberlander and Shmotkin, Early Years, chap. 3. During this time, the Ramash met some of the great Jewish intellectual luminaires, including Rabbi Yosef Rosen and Rabbi Shlomo Yosef Zevin. He was also privy to many of the challenges that the Rebbe faced.]] The Rebbe drew the young Ramash into his affairs. The Ramash’s mother recalled in her diary that the Rebbe “would not let him go and was always finding reasons to summon him. The Rebbe said he was appointing him as his ‘Minister of Education.’ He entrusted my son with many tasks requiring Torah scholarship and secular knowledge.”[[16: A Mother in Israel: The Life and Memoirs of Rebbetzin Chana Schneerson (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society), 4–45; “Memoirs of Rebbetzin Chana – Part 1,” available at: chabad.org/1638271.]]
At one point, the Ramash feared being detained by the Bolsheviks, and so in the summer of 1926, he found refuge in the home of Rabbi Chanoch Henoch Etkin in Luga, on the outskirts of Leningrad. Though Etkin was a rabbi, he also had regular employment, and the government did not harass him. His grandson, Rabbi She’ar Yashuv Cohen, recalls, “At the time the Ramash was engaged, the Bolsheviks began investigating him. He hid in my grandfather’s home for a few months. He spent his time studying and also learned Talmud with my grandfather daily.”[[17: Rabbi She’ar Yashuv Cohen (1927–2016) was the chief rabbi of Haifa. Once, in a meeting with the seventh Rebbe, the Rebbe recalled to Rabbi Cohen the time he spent in his grandfather’s home. Kfar Chabad, issues 827 and 889; Nisuei HaNesi’im, 36–37.]]
His presence in the Rebbe’s court and his participation in the Rebbe’s activities were the first stage of mentoring he received from the Rebbe that would prepare him for leadership after the Rebbe’s passing. His contact with notable Jewish scholars that began at this time, and which continued later in Riga and Poland, exposed the brilliant intellect of the young Ramash to the greatest rabbinic figures of the generation.[[18: The Rebbe once sent the Ramash to Rabbi Chaim Ozer Grodzinski with a request to sign a public call to assist Russian Jewry. When the Ramash arrived at the study hall adjacent to the rabbi’s office, some of the students decided to challenge his scholarship for sport. They assumed, as many Lithuanian yeshivah students generally did, that as a stereotypical Chasid, he lacked comprehensive talmudic expertise. They posed deep talmudic questions to the Ramash, but he remined silent and refused to engage. When the Ramash entered Rabbi Grodzinski’s office, he reviewed the conversation with him and refuted their points one after another. Rabbi Grodzinski, who had overheard some of the conversation outside his office, asked the Ramash why he didn’t respond to the students while they were challenging him. He answered, “They were jesting, and I saw no point. However, I was entrusted with a mission from the Rebbe and feared you might not take me seriously if I did not have talmudic acumen. Because that could have endangered the mission, I felt I had to respond to you.” Rabbi Baruch Ber Lebowitz, dean of the prestigious Kaminetz Yeshivah, and Rabbi Shaya Shimonowitz, later dean of Yeshivas Rabbeinu Yaakov Yosef in New York, witnessed this encounter. Rabbi Lebowitz later entered into a long talmudic discussion with the Ramash and, impressed by the depth of his knowledge, told him, “Come to Kaminetz and I will mentor you to be the next gadol hador, the next great leader of the generation.” The Ramash demurred. In 1966, Rabbi Shimonowitz told this story to Rabbi Yossi Krupnick, a student of his whom he reprimanded for coming late to class because he had attended a farbrengen of the seventh Rebbe that had concluded very late the night before. Author’s interview with Rabbi Yosef Krupnick; Oberlander and Shmotkin, Early Years; JEM Oral History Project.]]
Though the Ramash was naturally very reserved, the Rebbe encouraged rabbis to discuss various talmudic topics with him.
One of those rabbis was Rabbi Shlomo Yosef Zevin, secretary of the Rabbinical Committee in Russia at the time, and later one of the leading talmudic authorities in Israel. In 1950, after the Rebbe’s passing, Rabbi Zevin urged the Ramash to become Rebbe. “Thank G-d, a scion has been saved from the family of our Rebbe, who was educated and mentored in the home of the Rebbe Rayatz. You were always hand in hand [with the Rebbe Rayatz], and he never withheld any good [Torah] from you.”[[19: Yemei Bereishis (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1993), 202.]]
When the Russian authorities finally granted approval for the Rebbe and his family to depart Russia for Riga in October 1927, the Rebbe insisted that his future son-in-law also be permitted to leave. Russian officials challenged him. “Can’t you find another son-in-law?” they asked. The Rebbe’s legendary response was, “A son-in-law like him I can’t find there.”[[20: A Mother in Israel, 34.]]
The Ramash’s stay in Riga was brief. In December of 1927, two months after he arrived from Russia, he departed for Berlin.[[21: For a detailed account of the Rebbe’s time in Berlin, see Oberlander and Shmotkin, Early Years, chap. 4 and 5. Also see Joseph Telushkin, Rebbe: The Life and Teachings of Menachem M. Schneerson, the Most Influential Rabbi in Modern History.]] The day after he came to Berlin, he represented his future father-in-law at a convention of Agudath Israel,[[22: In a report that the Ramash sent the Rebbe about the convention, he wrote a detailed description of the conference and the people he met, lauding the organizers. Indicative of his reserved personality, the Ramash wrote, “I am hesitant to approach the directors of the conference more closely, lest my presence be used as a premise to draw the Rebbe into this.” Past Chabad Rebbes were not members of Agudath Israel (see chap. 2); perhaps the Ramash’s presence could be interpreted as a more formal participation. “I sufficed with being introduced to them. For this reason as well, I did not go to the dinner that was arranged for all the participants,” he wrote. The Ramash appears to prefer playing a quiet role, staying in the background. See Oberlander and Shmotkin, Early Years, 269–70, for the complete text of the Ramash’s report translated into English. The Hebrew original appears in Zusha Wolf, Admorei Chabad VeYahudut Germania, 233–35.]] continuing to play a role in the Rebbe’s affairs even from a distance. In Berlin he attended lectures[[23: Rabbi Yosef Dunner, a student at the yeshivah at the time, later remembered seeing the Ramash at Rabbi Weinberg’s classes. “Pini Dunner – Unknown Picture of the Late Lubavitcher Rebbe, c. 1930s,” The Seforim Blog, March 31, 2008, available at: https://seforimblog.com/2008/03/pini-dunner-unknown-picture-of-late/.]] by Rabbi Yechiel Yaakov Weinberg[[24: Rabbi Yechiel Yaakov Weinberg (1884–1966) was a distinguished scholar and the author of the Seridei Eish. Born in Poland, he attended the yeshivas of Mir and Slobodka and settled in Germany after the outbreak of World War I. He fled Germany in 1939 and was imprisoned by the Germans in the Warsaw Ghetto. He survived captivity and spent his last years in Switzerland.]] of the Rabbinical Seminary of Berlin. With Rabbi Weinberg’s help,[[25: The rabbinical seminary issued a letter facilitating his registration at the university. According to Rabbi Chaim Nachman Kovalsky, who was a student in the yeshivah in Berlin at the time, the Ramash requested a letter of certification in Torah scholarship from Rabbi Weinberg. When Rabbi Weinberg asked him what he should write as the sphere of Jewish learning in which the Ramash was proficient, the Ramash responded, “Whatever you would like.” Rabbi Weinberg then gave the Ramash a copy of his new work, a complex fifty-seven-page Jewish legal essay. The next morning, Rabbi Kovalsky says, “the Ramash knew every point by heart.” See “Entry Exam,” video available at: chabad.org/748972. The Ramash wrote notes on Rabbi Weinberg’s essay in Reshimot 127 and 128.]] the Ramash registered at Friedrich Wilhelm University and took courses in geometry, physics, and higher mathematics.[[26: Oberlander and Shmotkin, Early Years, 343–45.]] He spent a significant portion of the next four years, both before and after his wedding, in Berlin, periodically visiting Riga.[[27: During these four years, the Ramash met many notable Jewish scholars, such as Rabbis Joseph Soloveitchik, Yitzchak Hutner, and Abraham Joshua Heschel, and the Belzer Rebbe, Rabbi Yissachar Dov Rokeach.]]
Latvia was a free country, and now the wedding plans could move forward without government hindrance. But two obstacles still stood in the way. The first was securing permission from the Russian government for the Ramash’s parents to join the celebration. The second was financial – funds were needed in order to make a proper wedding for a Rebbe’s daughter. The Communist revolution had disrupted the regular flow of donations coming from Chasidim in Russia, and few Chasidim lived in Western Europe. With the time for the wedding approaching, the financial need became acute, although most were not aware of its extent.
Rabbi Yechezkel Feigin took matters into his own hands. Secretly writing to Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson in New York, he implored his old friend for help. “We must put our heads together and find a solution,” he wrote. The Rebbe had not told him explicitly how serious the financial straits were, but it seemed clear to him. “In the end, a wedding must be made. But with what?” He encouraged Jacobson to speak to members of the Chabad community in the US to ask for their assistance.[[28: Letter dated August 14, 1928. A copy of the letter appears in Nisuei HaNesi’im, 68.]]
The Ramash’s parents, Rabbi Levi Yitzchak and Rebbetzin Chana, petitioned the Russian authorities for an exit visa to attend their oldest son’s wedding.[[29: Igrot Kodesh 16:198. In a letter dated June 15, 1928 (26 Sivan, 5688), the Rebbe tells Rabbi Levi Yitzchak Schneerson that he is waiting to hear if they can procure passports to travel to the wedding. He asks to be updated so they can set a date. When the new Jewish year approached, it became clear that the Russian government was not going to grant permission to travel, and they therefore would have to set a date regardless.]] The government was inflexible, rejecting their application. The news was greeted with sadness in Riga. Finding no reason to delay the wedding any longer, the Rebbe set the date for 14 Kislev (November 27, 1928) in Warsaw.
Six weeks before the wedding, the financial situation was still dire. In mid-October, Feigin wrote to Jacobson again. “The chasidic community in Europe could not really help,” he explained, because of the suffering they had endured in the last few years. “You can’t imagine how it was,” he wrote, referring to the oppression in Russia. “Finances must come from your country.” He urged Jacobson to enlist Rabbi Shalom Dovber Rivkin, who had left Russia and was now in the US. He recommended that they launch an appeal. “Write to all the Temimim [alumni of the Chabad yeshivah] or telegram them.” Feigin pleaded with Jacobson to act swiftly.[[30: Letter dated Rosh Chodesh Cheshvan, October 18, 1928. A copy of the letter appears in Nisuei HaNesi’im, 78. Rivkin had been secretary of the Rebbe Rashab and was also close to the Rayatz (see chap. 3).]]
Around the world, Chasidim initiated their own grassroots efforts. In Kharkiv, Ukraine, Yehuda Chitrik had received an invitation for the wedding. “I realized right away there were major expenses.”[[31: Yehuda Chitrik, Reshimot Devarim, 440.]] He collected a thousand rubles and sent it to the Rebbe. Chasidim in other cities did the same. Somehow, through support in the US and Europe and through loans the Rebbe secured, the necessary funds were accumulated.
Instead of hosting the celebration in Riga, the Rebbe chose to hold it in the metropolis of Warsaw. Many Chasidim, among them Rabbi Eliyahu Chaim Althaus, wondered why. As he wrote in his diary, he dared not ask the Rebbe, “but still in my heart I harbored this question.”[[32: There are a number of different accounts of the wedding. Rabbi Althaus wrote a long, detailed description of the wedding for his fellow Chasidim who could not attend. He had a unique perspective because he accompanied the Rebbe from Riga and was tasked with taking care of the Ramash once they arrived in Warsaw. Segments can be found in Early Years, chap. 5. Another detailed account was written by Rabbi Shmuel Zalmanov, and there were also several newspaper articles. See Nisuei HaNesi’im.]] The night before the wedding, Althaus solved the riddle when he entered the yeshivah in Warsaw adorned with lights, filled with prominent rabbis, chasidic Rebbes and hundreds of students, to celebrate a pre-wedding dinner with the Rebbe and the Ramash. He realized that this would have been impossible in a more remote location like Riga.
To the amazement of the crowd, the Rebbe walked in adorned in his grandfather’s shtreimel.[[33: A fur hat that is worn on special occasions, the particular style of shtreimel worn by Lubavitcher Rebbes is known as a spodik. The Rebbe had inherited it from his father, who had received it from his father, the fourth Rebbe, Rabbi Shmuel. After wearing it in honor of the wedding, Rebbe continued wearing the shtreimel on Shabbat, holidays, and other special occasions, such when he received US citizenship on March 17, 1949 (video footage available at: chabad.org/471239). Other chasidic groups, such as Belz and Ger, have a tradition that men wear a shtreimel after marriage.]] “Those of us who were nearby stood in fear of the awe-inspiring look on the Rebbe’s pure face that shone under the shtreimel,” wrote Althaus. Customarily, Chabad Rebbes wore a shtreimel only when they were in the town of Lubavitch. When the Rashab fled Lubavitch in the face of the German invasion in 1915, he ceased wearing it. Now, the Rebbe Rayatz was wearing the shtreimel for the first time since assuming the position of Rebbe in 1920. The message was clear: After fourteen years of wandering and persecution, the glory and spiritual grandeur that Chasidim had felt in the town of Lubavitch was being reborn in Poland. The wedding marked a new era of Chabad, the flourishing of Chasidism in a new environment and a new country.
There were also other reasons for holding the celebration in Warsaw. As the center of the Jewish world, the message that Lubavitch was resilient would resound throughout Europe. This brought a ray of hope and optimism to the Chasidim remaining in Russia; Chabad had a future. As the Rebbe wrote to his uncle Moshe Horenstein, who accompanied the groom to the chuppah in place of his parents, “The chuppah will be on the grounds of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim. That is a reflection of the spirit of Lubavitch.” The yeshivah, the spiritual heart and essence of Chabad’s ideas and ideals, lived on.
Second, it was an opportunity to introduce the Ramash to the broader Jewish community. Until this point, he was relatively unknown outside of the Rebbe’s closest circle of Chasidim, especially because he didn’t live in Riga full-time. He was naturally reserved and did not seek the limelight. “The Ramash was characteristically an introvert,” says Rabbi Yoel Kahn,[[34: Author’s interview with Rabbi Yoel Kahn (1930–2021). Born in Russia, he immigrated to Palestine in 1935. In 1950, he arrived in New York shortly after the passing of the Rebbe Rayatz. He became the primary chozer, the person tasked with memorizing and transcribing the talks of the seventh Rebbe.]] chief recorder of the teachings of the seventh Rebbe. He had also chosen an unusual path by pursuing secular education at Europe’s top universities, causing some Chasidim to look at him warily. He kept to himself, even though he was involved with the Rebbe’s affairs, and he did not flout his Torah knowledge. At his wedding, he met some of the world’s greatest Jewish scholars; the Rebbe encouraged him to interact with them. One such leader was Rabbi Meir Shapiro, dean of one of Poland’s most prestigious yeshivas, Chachmei Lublin. The Rebbe introduced them, and the two had a long conversation about Rabbi Shapiro’s recent scholarly publication.[[35: It seems the Ramash was quite reticent to enter scholarly discussions. In a 1971 farbrengen, the seventh Rebbe remarked that he had wanted to “evade” the conversation with Rabbi Shapiro but felt compelled by his father-in-law, “who was very fond of [Rabbi Shapiro].” Farbrengen, Parshat Tzav, excerpted Nisuei HaNesi’im, 203.]] Afterward, Rabbi Shapiro remarked to the Rebbe, “Lubavitcher Rebbe, you have taken a son-in-law who is a gaon (outstanding Jewish scholar).”[[36: Account of Rabbi Shmuel Zalmanov, who witnessed the encounter at the wedding. According to Dr. Nissan Mindel, the Rebbe responded to Rabbi Meir Shapiro, “I know, but I wanted you to know too.” Nisuei HaNesi’im, part 2, 204.]]
A month before the wedding, invitations were sent in a variety of formats.[[37: The basic text was the same, with some additions depending on the specific recipients. Nine variations have been found, some with minor changes and others with more significant ones. See Nisuei HaNesi’im, 84–87 for a detailed description, including copies of many of the invitations. Years later, in 1953, the seventh Rebbe explained the history and special attention that the Rebbe gave to the invitations to his wedding. “Before the wedding of my sister-in-law [Sheina, in 1932], my father-in-law instructed that the text for her invitations be copied from our invitation. In response to my question, the Rebbe explained that this was the text used in his own wedding invitation. His, in turn, was copied from earlier ones. The text of the invitation includes four paragraphs, and the first letters of each spell out the word ahavah (‘love’)” (Torat Menachem, 5724, p. 198). Today it is customary for Chabad wedding invitations to use the same wording.]] To the Chasidim in Russia, the Rebbe wrote a special message, addressing them as “those who are far physically, but close and connected in soul and spirit.” Lamenting the barriers that prevented the recipients from leaving Russia to participate in the wedding, the Rebbe wrote, “Due to reasons that are out of our control, it will be impossible to celebrate together.” Instead, he asked them to organize celebrations in their local communities. Another special invitation, sent to the alumni of Tomchei Temimim and to select Chasidim, was a copy of a handwritten letter from the Rebbe. He also sent personal handwritten invitations to other chasidic Rebbes and distinguished scholars. The general public received printed invitations.
The Rebbe invited the needy Jews of Riga to participate in special free dinners in honor of the wedding. “The Lubavitcher Rebbe, in honor of the wedding of his daughter on November 27, is providing meals for free on Sunday and Monday,” read the advertisement in Riga’s paper, the Frimorgen. The Rebbe was following the ancient custom known as seudat aniyyim, providing meals to the indigent so they too can feel the joy of the wedding.[[38: Nitei Gavriel, Hilchos Nissuin 4:3: “Many have the custom to provide a meal for the poor for a day or two days before a wedding.”]]
On the Sunday before the wedding,[[39: November 25, 1928 (12 Kislev, 5689).]] the Rebbe departed to Warsaw. At the Riga train station, he was greeted by thousands of Chasidim, acquaintances, and well-wishers who came to see him off. Two rows of men stretching some five hundred feet stood as an honor guard as the Rebbe entered the station. To the sound of joyous song, the train slowly began to move, and the crowd followed, dancing alongside. Joining the Rebbe on the train were the groom, the Rebbe’s mother-in-law, his two daughters, his son-in-law the Rashag, and his grandson Berke Gurary. The bride and her mother had traveled to Warsaw a week earlier. As the train made its way to Warsaw, large crowds gathered in the stations in Dvinsk and Vilnius to wish the Rebbe well. Eliyahu Althaus, who was on the train when it pulled into Vilnius, wrote, “I was stunned to see such a massive crowd standing at the station.”[[40: Oberlander and Shmotkin, Early Years, 381–84 (letter written by Rabbi Eliyahu Chaim Althaus).]]
Tuesday, the day of the wedding, dawned cold. Temperatures did not rise above thirty-seven degrees.[[41: Weather report printed in Neir Platz newspaper, November 27, 1928, temperature converted to Fahrenheit. Years later, in 1951, when someone suggested moving a wedding ceremony inside due to cold weather, the seventh Rebbe remarked, “My wedding was in the winter, outside under the heavens, and I am very happy with the shidduch (match).” Nisuei HaNesi’im, 181.]] The weather did not restrain the enthusiasm of the Jewish community, reported Heint.[[42: Heint (Today) was a Yiddish daily published in Warsaw. November 28, 1928 (15 Kislev, 5689).]] “From 3:00 p.m., crowds streamed to the yeshivah where the chuppah was to take place. Only those with tickets were permitted to enter. Because the crowds were so large, the doors to the courtyard of the yeshivah were sealed until more police came to clear the area.” The Rebbe and the groom arrived at the hall at 6:30 p.m. Afterward, “the bride arrived in a car decked in flowers.”
“The courtyard was ablaze with light, and the chuppah stood in its center, surrounded by five thousand people,” wrote Rabbi Shmuel Zalmanov in a long account of the wedding to his friends. Heint reported, “The courtyard was jam-packed, and others gazed from windows and balconies.” According to Der Moment,[[43: Der Moment was a Yiddish daily published in Warsaw. November 28, 1928 (15 Kislev, 5689).]] “The crowd was very different from those of other chasidic Rebbes. You don’t see shtreimels here; most wear European Jewish dress in the Chabad style…. During the chuppah it was very packed, and the pickpockets worked hard, stealing purses and wallets.”
The Rebbe’s uncle and aunt, Rabbi Moshe and Chaya Horenstein, escorted the groom to the chuppah. The Rebbe and his wife then brought the bride. The Rebbe himself conducted the ceremony and recited the traditional seven blessings.
After the chuppah at the yeshivah, the wedding moved to a large hall nearby for dinner. Rabbi Yochanan Gordon attended the wedding, and his son spoke of his father’s recollection of that special evening. “The Rebbe was in a state of elation. He walked around like a host, with a bottle of liquor and cups,” giving out a lechaim to his guests. Gordon says the Rebbe knew each person’s needs and showered them with blessings for health, children, and livelihood. He describes the many chasidic Rebbes, adorned in their Shabbat garb, with whom the Rebbe danced. “It was beautiful.”
At one point, the Rebbe came over to the students who were standing along the walls and sat in their midst. He asked the dean of the yeshivah to distribute a toast to all the students and then called out to them, “Lechaim, lechaim, Temimim! Torah is retained only by one who sacrifices himself for it.[[44: Berakhot 63b.]] Only through exertion can one preserve his Torah studies. And to acquire Torah one must exert himself.” He went on to explain that even a student who understands a concept at the first attempt “will not reach the same depths as the individual who exerts himself,” even if that person is not intellectually gifted. He added that “Torah is true wisdom. It is godliness. Even Torah’s simplest teachings are divine.”[[45: Oberlander and Shmotkin, Early Years, chap. 5, Zalmanov letter.]]
At 11:00 p.m., the Rebbe began teaching a maamar.[[46: The maamar was based on the wedding blessing, “He who created joy.” Maamar Asher Bara Sasson VeSimchah, Sefer Maamarim 5689, 86–94.]] He paused an hour later for the celebratory meal. The dancing continued throughout the night, and at 4:00 a.m., the Rebbe resumed the maamar for another half-hour. The meal concluded at 6:00 in the morning.[[47: Oberlander and Shmotkin, Early Years, chap. 5, Zalmanov letter.]]
Around the world, Chasidim rejoiced with their own farbrengens. Yaakov Dubrashvili remembers the celebration in Tbilisi, Soviet Georgia. “We received an invitation from the Rebbe for the wedding, and understandably, we could not go.” They rejoiced the whole night locally, and the next morning they attempted to send a congratulatory telegram to Poland. Local police suspected that it was a secret message and accused Dubrashvili of spying. Once they realized that the telegram was indeed a wedding greeting, they sent it free of charge.[[48: Nisuei HaNesi’im, 231–36.]] In Tel Aviv, local Chasidim began the evening by studying the Rebbe’s invitation, analyzing it and seeking its deeper meaning. Chasidim gathered in Chicago, Philadelphia, and other US cities. In remote Finland, the sole Chasid, Rabbi Mordechai Schwei, also marked the day, writing, “I shared in the joy with all the Temimim and the Rebbe.”[[49: Letter from Schwei to Zelig Slonim dated 16 Tevet, 5690 ( January 16, 1930), Nisuei HaNesi’im, 236.]] The Rebbe’s daughter’s marriage was not just a personal moment of joy, but a time of gladness for all the Chasidim.
The most poignant celebration outside of Warsaw took place nine hundred miles to the east, in the home of the Ramash’s parents in Yekaterinoslav, Ukraine. The Ramash’s parents could not rent a hall for the celebration; the only place where it could be held was in their small apartment. Half of it had been confiscated, and a wall was erected to carve out a separate apartment for another family. That family, says Rebbetzin Chana Schneerson, generally kept their distance, because they were afraid of being associated with religion. “Somehow, however, our neighbor heard in town that we wanted to hold a celebration to mark the wedding. For our benefit, he broke through the wall between the apartments, opening his apartment to ours. He removed all his furniture and moved out as well, giving us the use of his apartment for as long as we would need.”
Invitations were sent out to friends and relatives in Dnipropetrovsk and the surrounding region. “Guests and family members came from neighboring towns, and we received several hundred telegrams. The evening event at home was attended by representatives of the central Jewish community of our region. Every synagogue, even if it had relatively few members, sent representatives, many of them accompanied by their wives.” They came despite the fact that “contact with clergy was forbidden, a crime that could cost you your job,” wrote Rebbetzin Chana.
Shmuel Schneerson, the Ramash’s uncle, wrote to him describing the night in Dnipropetrovsk. There were speeches until 11:00 at night, he wrote, followed by a celebratory meal and then dancing that “went on nonstop, lasting until 7:00 in the morning.”[[50: Letter from Shmuel Schneerson, Nisuei HaNesi’im, 228.]] The evening’s exuberance was tinged with sadness. “Our longing for [the Ramash] was indescribable and our anguish was felt by the community,” Rebbetzin Chana wrote. “I don’t wish upon anyone the experience and taste of not being present at their child’s personal celebration.”[[51: A Mother in Israel, 6; “Memoirs of Rebbetzin Chana – Part 10,” available at: chabad.org/1708351.]]
The marriage of the Ramash to the Rebbe’s daughter also highlighted the bond between the two men, and their relationship continued to grow. The Ramash was involved, often behind the scenes, in the Rebbe’s affairs while in Europe. Later, in the US, the Ramash took a more public role, spearheading vital projects in the last decade of the Rebbe’s life. On a deeper spiritual level, the wedding cemented the Ramash’s bond with the Chasidim. At a farbrengen in 1953[[52: Shabbat, November 21, 1953 (14 Kislev, 5714).]] marking his twenty-fifth wedding anniversary, the seventh Rebbe discussed the significance of his wedding. Though he rarely spoke about himself, that day he made an uncharacteristically personal reflection: “Generally speaking, even regarding a private person, his wedding constitutes an all-encompassing event. For me, however, my wedding day brought me into more general and communal affairs.” Then, considering the bond between himself and the Chasidim, he told those gathered that the wedding “connected me to you, and you to me.”
Three days after the wedding, the family returned to Riga, where the week of sheva brachot (post-wedding celebrations) continued. One of the Chasidim who hesitated to join the Shabbat celebration was Noach Lulov, whose son had arrested the Rebbe two years earlier. He shared with Rabbi Avraham Goldin that when the Rebbe heard he was not coming, “he invited me personally.”[[53: For the week following a wedding, there are daily celebrations called sheva brachot, at which seven special blessings are recited in honor of the bride and groom. Lulov’s son Grigory, who had become a Communist, arrested the Rebbe two years earlier in Russia. Rabbi Avraham Goldin was in Riga at the time; years later, he recounted that Lulov told him that the Rebbe invited him personally to the sheva brachot celebration on Shabbat. Clearly, the Rebbe made this gesture to Lulov because he realized the distress and embarrassment he must feel over his son’s actions. Recording of Goldin available at: https://col.org.il/news/127931.]]
For the next two months, the young couple stayed in Riga. Afterward, they headed to Berlin, where they resided for three years as the Ramash continued his university education. In the spring of 1933, as the Nazi threat began to grow, they left Berlin and after a brief interlude in Riga, resettled in Paris. There the Ramash pursued a degree in engineering.[[54: Chaim Miller, Turning Judaism Outward (Brooklyn, NY: Kol Menachem), chap. 7.]] The Ramash was very reserved, but slowly the chasidic community began to recognize his intellectual acumen. While the Rebbe was in the US during the High Holidays of 1929, the Ramash was encouraged to lead a farbrengen in Riga in his absence. Rabbi Eliyahu Chaim Althaus, who was present at that Sukkot farbrengen, wrote a glowing report to the Rebbe. “[The Ramash] spoke for hours on end saying words of Chasidut with teachings from our Sages.” Addressing the wariness that some Chasidim felt toward the Ramash because of his secular education, Althaus wrote, “The critics and cynics have been silenced.” News of the amazing talk in the sukkah spread around town so that a few days later, on Simchat Torah, “a huge crowd gathered to join the Ramash for hakafot (traditional holiday dancing with the Torah).” Describing that night, Althaus wrote, “Rabbi Menachem Mendel sat at the head of the table and spoke for four hours straight. As people left, they were saying that they had never seen or heard anything like it.”[[55: Letter from Althaus to family and friends, excerpted in “Of Heart and Quill,” available at: https://derher.org/wp-content/uploads/50-Cheshvan-5777-06.pdf.]]
From when the Ramash arrived in Riga until the outbreak of World War II, just over a decade, the Rebbe mentored the Ramash. Though they did not live close to each other, opportunities arose when the young couple visited with the Rebbe for the High Holidays season or for Passover. Some of these visits were for longer durations. The Rebbe, in turn, visited his daughter and son-in-law in Berlin and later in Paris, as part of his travels. All through the 1930s, as the Rebbe sought medical care in Berlin, Vienna, Paris, and the spas of Marienbad, the Ramash was by his side.[[56: See appendix 2 of this book. The Ramash spent months at time with the Rebbe during his various medical treatments in Berlin, Vienna, Paris, and Marienbad.]] This included a two-month stay in Berlin starting in January 1933 and a six-month stay in the West End Sanitorium in Perchtoldsdorf on the outskirts of Vienna, starting in November 1934. These times that the Ramash and the Rebbe were together for an extensive period provided more opportunities for mentorship and conversation. At times, the Ramash functioned as the Rebbe’s secretary, helping him with correspondence and other affairs.
From the time he was in Riga, the Ramash began to record his interactions with his father-in-law in a detailed private diary. It included a wealth of chasidic lore, history, and customs, with anecdotes of all the Rebbes, tracing back to the founder of the chasidic movement, Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov. These notations, discovered in his desk[[57: “1994: Discovery of the ‘Reshimot,’” available at: chabad.org/62186.]] shortly after his passing, were published posthumously.[[58: The notations were published as Torat Menachem: Reshimat HaYoman (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2006). The book is printed in two parts. The first is written in the exact wording that the Ramash used at the time, and the second contains context, translations from Yiddish to Hebrew, and scholarly footnotes with sources added by the editors. The first notation is dated December 18, 1928 (5 Tevet, 5689). Most of Torat Menachem was written in Europe before World War II, but there are also small sections written in Brooklyn in the early 1940s.]] They are are a window into the internal exchanges between the Rebbe Rayatz and the future seventh Rebbe, reflecting a deep spiritual dialogue that occurred over the course of a decade.[[59: Excerpts of the reshimot with English translation available at: chabad.org/1210901.]] “There were long conversations between the two men, often centering on Chabad history and customs,” writes Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz.[[60: Rabbi Adin Even-Israel Steinsaltz, My Rebbe ( Jerusalem: Maggid Books, 2014), 38.]] Many notations in the diary refer to scholarly issues and details of the Rebbe’s personal observance of Jewish tradition. In the years to come, when asked about certain chasidic traditions, the seventh Rebbe would invariably say, “I witnessed my father-in-law the Rebbe do such-and-such,” or at times indicate that a certain practice was not the Chabad custom because he had not observed the Rebbe acting in that fashion.
Even when the two were not physically near each other, the relationship and mentorship continued. Hundreds of letters sent frequently between the Rebbe and his daughter and son-in-law reveal an intimate connection.[[61: See Igrot Kodesh, vol. 15. The volume includes 303 letters spanning 1926 to 1946, mostly during the years the Ramash and his wife lived in Berlin and Paris. It omits additional letters of a more personal nature or those dealing with the details of the Rebbe’s health and personal financial issues. See introduction to volume 15 by Rabbi Berel Levin for a historical overview.]] These included long letters sent by the Rebbe to the Ramash explaining the history and theology of Chabad. In one lengthy letter sent in January 1932, the Rebbe explores in depth the distinctive focus of Chabad on intellectual ideas and spiritual growth, as opposed to other chasidic groups, which emphasize the spiritual qualities of their Rebbes and their miraculous works.[[62: Igrot Kodesh 2:361, letter dated 24 Tevet, 5692 ( January 3, 1932). For the English translation see “Supplement B: Letter by the Previous Rebbe,” available at: https://www.sie.org/templates/sie/article_cdo/aid/2347628/jewish/Supplement-B-Letter-by-the-Previous-Rebbe.htm. This letter was later published in Hatomim, vol. 2.]] The Ramash responded, “From the depths of my heart, I thank you for this precious gift.”[[63: In that correspondence, the Ramash writes that he is still “puzzled” because “again and again, I hear people say, ‘In Chabad, we have no interest in miracles’ and the like. I found this same sentiment expressed in your letter.” Clearly, the intergenerational conversation continued on this and many other topics. See “Supplement C: The Rebbe’s Response to Previous Rebbe’s Letter,” available at: https://www.sie.org/templates/sie/article_cdo/aid/2347629/jewish/Supplement-C-The-Rebbes-Response-to-Previous-Rebbes-Letter.htm.]]
Another part of the intellectual interaction between the two was the Hatomim magazine. The periodical, founded in 1935, was a platform for the Rebbe to promulgate teachings of Chabad and reinforce the importance of the yeshivah, now located in Poland, as a premier center of Jewish learning. It featured chasidic teachings, history, and scholarly essays. The Rebbe asked his son-in-law to review articles for the magazine; few knew that the Ramash was assisting with the editing from his home in Paris.
The Ramash was entrusted with many missions on the Rebbe’s behalf. In 1932, the Rebbe urged his son-in-law, then in Berlin, to work on attaining repatriation of the historic library that had been seized by the Russian government.[[64: Igrot Kodesh 15:117. In later years, the seventh Rebbe continued the effort. With the collapse of the Soviet Union, he appointed a committee of leading shluchim and librarians of the Agudas Chassidei Chabad Library to recover the confiscated books and arrange its repatriation. That effort continues until today.]] The Ramash also assisted the Rebbe in expanding his library. “He spent hours going to libraries on behalf of his father-in-law, searching for specific titles and manuscripts,” writes Steinsaltz.[[65: Steinsaltz, My Rebbe.]] When the Polish government enacted currency restrictions, making it problematic to transfer funds in and out of the country,[[66: In 1936, the Polish government withdrew from the “gold block” and instituted currency restrictions. Polish Jewish tourists in Palestine in 1936 also suffered from this when the Polish bank limited the transfer of funds to their accounts. “Polish Currency Curbs Forcing 1,000 Tourists to Quit Palestine,” JTA, May 5, 1936, available at: https://www.jta.org/1936/05/05/archive/polish-currency-curbs-forcing-1000-tourists-to-quit-palestine.]] the Rebbe, then in Poland, entrusted his son-in-law in Paris with much of his financial affairs, having him open accounts there and maintain records on his behalf. The Rebbe instructed donors across the globe to send their contributions directly to the Ramash in Paris.[[67: Igrot Kodesh 15:216.]] The Rebbe’s correspondence with the Ramash reveals extensive instructions, often written in code to maintain confidentiality, on transferring funds to the institutions and projects the Rebbe supported in Russia and other countries.[[68: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 15, Introduction.]]
While involved with the Rebbe’s work from a distance, the primary goal of the Ramash was the pursuit of scholarship. In March 1940, when the Rebbe was heading to New York, the Ramash hesitated to leave Paris to join him. Yechezkel Feigin wrote to Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson, asking him to encourage the Ramash to come to the US. “He has a great ability to draw the younger generation closer to Jewish observance,” Feigin wrote. The Ramash resisted the request, seemingly because he feared it would detract from his studies. Feigin told Jacobson that the opposite was true: “He has completed his secular studies and [now] can dedicate himself totally to the sacred,” referring to Torah.[[69: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 15.]]
After the German invasion a few months later, the Ramash and his wife made a harrowing escape from Paris via Vichy, France, and Portugal, arriving in the US in March 1941. At that point, his involvement in the Rebbe’s affairs expanded greatly. In 1941, the Rebbe established Kehot Publication Society, a publishing house for the works of Chasidism and Judaism in general, and he appointed the Ramash as its chairman. The Ramash was also appointed executive director of another two corporations founded that year by the Rebbe: Machne Israel, Chabad’s social service agency, and Merkos L’Inyonei Chinuch, its central education branch. Merkos, as it is colloquially known, took the lead in establishing the first national network of Jewish day schools and eventually began to oversee the global network of Chabad shluchim and institutions that continues to this day.
The Rebbe’s spiritual guidance of his son-in-law, who would eventually succeed him as the seventh Rebbe of Lubavitch, is illustrated in the following anecdote.
After the Ramash joined the Rebbe in New York, he maintained an office on the first floor of the movement’s headquarters at 770 Eastern Parkway, right near the study hall. Every day, the Ramash visited his father-in-law in his residence on the second floor. When he came down, yeshivah students would congregate near the elevator, hoping to hear him retell “frisha zachen (fresh goods)” – stories, directives, or Torah teachings that he had just heard from the Rebbe. One day in 1943, Dovid Edelman[[70: Private transcript of a conversation between Rabbi Dovid Edelman and his son Rabbi Yisroel Edelman. Rabbi Dovid became a shliach of the Rebbe in the 1940s and eventually moved to Springfield, Massachusetts, where he headed the Lubavitch Yeshivah Academy until his passing in 2015. For more, see Menachem Posner, “Rabbi Dovid Edelman, 90, Educator and Longtime Chabad Leader in Massachusetts,” available at: chabad.org/2817283.]] and Hershel Fogelman,[[71: In the mid-1940s, at the behest of the Rebbe, Rabbi Hershel Fogelman founded Yeshivah Achei Temimim Academy in Worchester, Massachusetts, serving as its leader until his passing in 2013. For more, see Menachem Posner, “Rabbi Hershel Fogelman, Trailblazing Educator, Builder of Communities,” available at: chabad.org/2261879.]] two students ages eighteen and twenty-two respectively, were waiting at the elevator door when the Ramash exited.
“Some of the Jews who visit me in my office,” the Ramash told them, “were brought up in religious environments, but sadly they didn’t keep up their observance once they came to America. Some of the elder Chasidim have chastised me for not criticizing their behavior, instead warmly welcoming everyone equally.[[72: It took some years before this perspective on non-observant Jews became mainstream, even among those in the Chabad community. During the 1950s and 1960s, the concept of shlichut, becoming an emissary of the Rebbe, was not supported by all in the Chabad community. It was revolutionary for a couple from an Orthodox home to be sent to live in a community lacking basic religious infrastructure. Rabbi Shlomo Cunin, sent by the Rebbe in 1965 to California, recalls Chasidim in New York telling him that he would not last long on the West Coast and insinuating that he was only going because he could not get a job close to home. Much of the religious world had been decimated by the abandonment of observance, and this prompted many to look at the irreligious community with disdain. Today, however, even in the most insular segments of the Orthodox community, people are open to outreach. For more, see David Eliezrie, The Secret of Chabad.]]
“I went to ask the Rebbe if I was acting correctly,” he continued. “If it’s wrong, I would stop.” The Ramash told them that the Rebbe explained to him that G-d created a feeling of unlimited love in a father and mother, no matter how many children they have. And if one of the children is missing something, like a hand or a leg, the parent will naturally feel a more special, unique love for that child. “The Rebbe told me: ‘G-d, too, loves every Jew completely, but if a Jew is missing something, He loves him or her even more. So if a Jew comes into your office and does not observe the commandments, we must accept him wholeheartedly; this is a precious Jew. When you greet someone who does not lay tefillin – missing a hand, so to speak – or who does not attend synagogue – missing a leg, so to speak – you must have a deeper love for him, because the more he is lacking, the greater your love must be. You should conduct yourself like G-d does.”
This philosophy clearly infused the Ramash’s leadership as the seventh Rebbe.[[73: When the great rabbinical scholars took their students and left Russia at the onset of Communism, the Rebbe remained because he believed he had a responsibility for all Jews. When he visited America in 1929–30, he prioritized reaching out to those who were not observant. Even before setting foot on US soil, while still on the ship fleeing the Nazis in 1940, he directed Rabbi Chaim Hodakov to prepare a plan for a national network of Jewish education to stem the tide of assimilation. In the postwar era, he sent his Chasidim to live in communities around the world to set the stage for global Jewish renewal. In 1948, he established Kfar Chabad, the Chabad village in Israel, and instructed that its focus should be to reach beyond religious Jews to all Israelis. His final endeavor was the establishment of a Jewish educational network for Jews in Northern Africa (referring to them as “Our Brethren of Sephardic Jewry”), a project set in motion by the Ramash just a week after the Rebbe’s passing.]] It is but one example of mentorship offered by the Rebbe to his son-in-law that was translated into a global Jewish renaissance. Being involved in the Rebbe’s medical care, editing his Torah teachings for print, taking responsibility for his financial affairs, and spearheading the movement’s outreach, all set the stage for the Ramash to assume the mantle of leadership of Chabad.

