Hovering offshore in New York Harbor on a balmy March morning[[1: The voyage from Gothenburg, Sweden, to New York Harbor took twelve days, arriving on Monday, March 18 at 4:00 p.m. Port regulations required the ship to wait overnight until it docked. The Rebbe departed the next day, Tuesday, March 19 (9 Adar II) at Pier 97 on West 57th Street in Manhattan. “America Is No Different: A Selection of Vintage Film Clips of Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak of Lubavitch in the United States,” JEM (Brooklyn, NY: 1999); Video of the Rebbe’s arrival, “The Previous Rebbe’s Arrival to America,” available at: chabad.org/363468; for a personal account of one of the travelers, see Introduction, Sefer HaMaamarim, 5700.]] was the Swedish liner Drottningholm, worn from her journey across the North Atlantic. The ship had pulled in the night before, after a harrowing ordeal, stopped at several points along the way by British warships and German submarines. According to port regulations, the weary passengers, the Rebbe and his family among them, would have to wait until the morning to disembark.
For the passengers, America was a refuge from war-torn Europe. For the Rebbe it was a new spiritual frontier with immense potential. He wanted to create a robust, self-assured Jewish life, and reinvigorating Jewish education was the foundation of his strategy to remold American Jewry. He intended to go on the offensive, motivated by his pride in uncompromising standards of Judaism. This was, he believed, his next mission, orchestrated by divine providence.
A delegation of US Chabad leaders motored to the vessel to welcome the Rebbe. Joyously, they boarded the ship and entered the Rebbe’s stateroom. The Rebbe greeted them warmly but quickly turned their focus to practical matters. “The suffering I endured in prison in Russia does not compare to the torments of the twelve weeks I spent under their [Nazi] rule. Now we will quickly take care of the formalities and get to work immediately. Our work is Torah and Yiddishkeit. As for the contention that we are weak physically, that we have no strength, Hashem is, after all, hanoten laya’eif koach (the one gives strength to those who are weary),” he said, quoting from the morning prayers. “It is written al kol neshimah veneshimah tehallel Kah – we must give thanks and praise to G-d for every breath.”
When the Rebbe finally disembarked, a crowd of thousands welcomed him. Among them was sixteen-year-old Yitzchok Groner. Early that morning, his father woke him. “You’re going to miss a day at Yeshivah Torah Vodaath. Today we’re going to the port – the Rebbe is arriving.”[[2: Talk by Rabbi Groner, Sydney, Australia, Rosh Chodesh Kislev, 5747, tapes of Rabbi Groner.]] Thirteen-year-old Risya Kazarnovsky also rose early that morning, too excited to sleep the night before. Before sunrise, she dressed in a special outfit, a camel-colored coat with brown buttons and a broad-brimmed hat to match.[[3: Author’s interview with Risya Kazarnovsky.]] By dawn she stood on the pier with her father, Rabbi Shlomo Aharon Kazarnovsky, one of the prominent Chabad rabbis in the US who played a key leadership role in Chabad’s growth. Also at the dock was Eliezer Shoen, an observant Jew, though not a Chasid. He recalled years later, “There were many traditional Jews, not fully observant, who came to welcome the Rebbe.” His miraculous rescue touched a chord, and the Rebbe inspired many people to reembrace the traditions they had left behind in Europe, Shoen said.[[4: Author’s interview with Aaron Rakeffet. Shoen recalled the details of the day to his niece and her husband, Rabbi Aaron and Malka Rakeffet.]] At the dock, historian Gershon Kranzler saw Jews of all types. “Young and old, rich and poor, bearing the traditional kaftan, black hats, beards and peyos, or the most elaborate creations of Parisian courtiers, they pushed and jostled each other to get closer and have a look at the man in the round fur cap and reddish grey long beard.”[[5: The Wonder Rabbi, a biographical sketch of the Rayatz with handwritten annotations of the seventh Rebbe. There is no author’s name on this work, but by comparing it to other documents in the Mindel Archives it is clear that the author is Gershon Kranzler.]] For Groner and Kazarnovsky, the impact would be much more personal.[[6: Both became pioneering emissaries of the Rebbe. Groner was sent by the Rebbe to Australia in 1947 for six months, and in 1958 the seventh Rebbe sent him there permanently. He led Chabad in Australia until he passed away in 2008. See Dovid Zaklikowski, “Rabbi Yitzchok Dovid Groner (1925–2008),” available at: chabad.org/698882. Risya Kazarnovsky married Rabbi Zalman Posner. They were the first Chabad shluchim in Nashville, Tennessee, arriving in 1949. Risya passed away in 2007. See Sue Fishkoff, “Pioneering Chabad Emissary, Mother, and Grandmother Passes Away in Nashville,” available at: chabad.org/585088.]] They did not realize that the Rebbe’s arrival would be a turning point, propelling their lives in a direction they could not have imagined.
New York’s Yiddish daily, Der Tog, wrote that the rabbinic group Agudas Harabonim could have held its annual convention at the pier.[[7: Agudas Harabonim, the Union of Orthodox Rabbis, was a prominent rabbinical association in the US. Mizrachi also sent a large delegation to greet the Rebbe. Der Tog, March 20, 1940.]] Young Yitzchok Groner remembers encountering a massive security presence. His father had VIP status, so “he got a pin and was permitted to stand in the front.” Yitzchok wasn’t so lucky. He was pushed further back in the crowd.
The Rebbe did not march off the ship as he had done on his visit to America eleven years earlier. He came down the gangway in a wheelchair, guided by one of the ship’s officers, bedecked by a shtreimel, which is customarily worn on Shabbat and holidays. His countenance made an impression on those present. Kranzler says, “His very presence seemed to electrify the large crowd.” The Brooklyn Eagle reported that he had a “reddish gray beard and a face stern and luminous as if from another epoch, from the era of the Geonim.” He looked “malchusdik,” like spiritual royalty, says Avraham Hecht, the American student who fled Poland when the war broke out. The Herald Tribune described the Rebbe as “a man of striking appearance.” Shoen says “many broke out in tears.”
When the crowd saw the Rebbe coming down the gangway, they cried out, “Shalom aleikhem!” Cantor Shmuel Kantaroff joyously began to sing the Shehechiyanu blessing. Seized with excitement, the crowd burst into a lively chasidic tune. Risya Kazarnovsky says the singing was a moment of personal affirmation for her, a girl who went to public school whose family always seemed different from those of her peers. “These were the Chabad melodies I heard at home,” she says. Groner strained to get a glimpse of the Rebbe. “I gave a jump, and I saw the Rebbe.”
On the dock, at the bottom of the gangway, a reporter approached the Rebbe asking why he came to America. He replied, “Altz iz hashgacha prutis, gekumen machen America a makom Torah – Everything is by divine providence. I came to make America a center of Torah.” The reporter responded with skepticism. “You will see hair on my hand before America will become a center of Torah.” The Rebbe rebuffed his doubts. “I don’t know about hair, but America will become a center of Jewish learning.” Rising from his wheelchair, the Rebbe was emphatic. “America iz nisht aderesh – America is no different. It will become a center of Torah.”[[8: Interview with Edith Block, JEM Oral History Project.]]
The Rebbe was wheeled to the nearby reception area, and the crowd ebbed and flowed as everyone strained to see him. Government officials greeted the Rebbe, and he thanked everyone for the warm welcome. The Rebbe’s voice was low, though “occasionally his determination [overcame] his fatigue and his voice would grow stronger,” reported the Brooklyn Eagle. Hundreds climbed tables and benches to see and hear the goings on. “Tears ran from the eyes of Chasidim hanging from the stage,” reported Der Tog.[[9: Der Tog, March 20, 1940.]] The Rebbe addressed the crowd, the fate of Polish Jewry weighing heavily on his heart. “It’s painful for me to shatter the sense of joy,” he said in an anguished tone, “but we can’t be silent in the face of the agonizing cry of our brothers and sisters and my students in yeshivah in Poland.” He urged the crowd to act. “We must do all that we can to save those in the Polish inferno.”[[10: Uri Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, 5700 (Brooklyn, NY: 2015), chap. 6.]]
From the port, the Rebbe headed to the Greystone Hotel on Manhattan’s Upper West Side. It would be his base for the next few months until a permanent home was purchased. Services were conducted in the Rebbe’s apartment and in the hotel’s ballroom. Later that day, the Rebbe addressed the large crowd that congregated in the hotel, again highlighting the crisis of Polish Jewry and the need to save them. He connected it to the broader theme of ahavat Yisrael, the Torah commandment of love and concern for another, reminding the crowd of its importance as a foundational Jewish ideal. “The love of G-d and the love of another are intrinsically bonded together,” the Rebbe said. “One who loves G-d also loves his fellow Jews, and the person who is concerned with the welfare of others will rise in his devotion to G-d. We cannot, and we dare not, forget the predicament of our brothers overseas. We must do everything possible to give them the support for whatever they need.” The Rebbe implored the crowd to support them and assist in their escape from the clutches of the Nazis.
The Rebbe also outlined his broad vision for American Jewry. “It is time to fortify Jewish education in the US,” he said. He began to implement his plan immediately. “Tomorrow, in the Oneg Shabbat Synagogue, Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim Lubavitch will open in America.”[[11: Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, 5700, chap. 7.]] Earlier, the Rebbe and local leaders had met in the hotel and resolved to start the yeshivah.
The same day, the Rebbe issued a statement to the press urging American Jews to stand behind the work of the JDC, “whose exemplary activity for Polish Jewry is well known.” He also asked for support toward a “rescue fund to enable the evacuation of the students [of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim] from Poland.”[[12: For the full statement, see Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, appendix B, “A Call to American Jewry.”]] He called for a new direction for US Jewry, explaining that Poland had been the center of Jewish scholarship, and that America, blessed with peace, “must now become the Torah center of the Jewish people. I am willing to work with all of those interested in furthering religious education.” The Rashag told the press that that Rabbi Hodakov, the overseer of Jewish schools in the Latvian Ministry of Education, was going to spend six months organizing day schools in the US.[[13: Brooklyn Eagle. The assertion that Hodakov would be in the US for just six months indicates that the fear for the welfare of Jews in Poland did not extend to all of Europe. Apparently, Hodakov was still planning to return to Latvia.]]
This was a marked contrast from the intentions the Rebbe had voiced to Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson during a private meeting in Otwock just days before the war started.[[14: Di Yiddishe Heim, issue no. 33, Autumn 5728 (1968).]] “I am entering my sixtieth year, my Shabbat years,” the Rebbe told Jacobson. He explained that he wanted to “focus inward on the chasidic community, rebuild his yeshivah, and refrain from being involved with broader communal issues.” He said, “I want to be a Rebbe for my Chasidim, not for the whole world. “A few months after arriving in New York, the Rebbe quoted Proverbs, “Many thoughts are in the heart of man,” saying that now that he was turning sixty, he had hoped that G-d would grant him “the good fortune of a peaceful life.” The war dashed that dream.
The voyage from Riga had been a time for personal reflection. “The ten days from Riga to New York were my Ten Days of Penitence and decision-making about the kind of life that I would have to undertake on the site of my new shlichut (mission).” In the Rebbe’s eyes, that duty was “the task of bringing to America the mesirat nefesh (self-sacrifice) for unadulterated Torah study that my revered father implanted in Tomchei Temimim.”[[15: Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, 5700, chap. 24.]] The goal was for America to replace Europe as a center of Torah. As the Young Israel Viewpoint wrote, “With his arrival the center of gravity of Jewish life shifts from the old world to the new.” The Rebbe’s long US sojourn a decade earlier had prepared him. As historian Rabbi Dr. Aaron Rakeffet explains, “The Rebbe came knowing the lay of the land and he would have a broad vision that impacted US Jewry. Other leaders would act defensively, taking care of their own needs.”[[16: Rabbi Dr. Aaron Rakeffet, “Post-1939 – The Change in American Torah Judaism,” audio lecture available at: https://www.yutorah.org/sidebar/lecturedata/968804/Post-1939The-Change-in-American-Torah-Judaism.]]
Years later, the seventh Rebbe explained[[17: Farbrengen, Motza’ei Shabbat, 10 Shevat, 5734 (February 2, 1974).]] that there were three distinct periods of the Rebbe’s leadership between 1920 and 1950. There was the first decade, in Russia, when the Rebbe risked his life standing up to Communism. The second period was in Latvia and Poland, where Rebbe attempted to establish the unique approach of Chabad Chasidism, despite skepticism, envy, and criticism from others. Finally, the last decade was in the US, where the Rebbe wanted to wake up American Jewy and change its trajectory. He arrived “as a refugee, depending on the kindness of the country that received him graciously.” Despite this, the Rebbe sought to change American society, announcing in his first proclamation that the reason he was settling there was to transform the United States – challenging the very idea that America was a “new world” where all things, including Judaism, were done differently.
This new vision worried some of the Rebbe’s closest supporters. Later that first evening, two of them met privately with the Rebbe. “I was visited by two notable individuals, veteran Americans and my most devoted friends.” The Rebbe recounted their warning in his diary: “We must tell you that your noble desires are not feasible in America, no matter what exertion is invested.”[[18: Uri Kaploun, trans., Likkutei Dibburim, vol. 3 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2012), chap. 24a.]] They felt “duty bound” to save the Rebbe from “a catastrophic disappointment and shameful failure.” One cautioned, “America is a land that devours good people. It gobbles up the greatest of newly arrived distinguished men.” The second advised, “America is a land of fleetingly fiery enthusiasm and of endlessly cold-blooded interference. Many famous Torah scholars received warm welcomes. In the end, these highly esteemed rabbis have been forgotten, shunted off the side like outcasts.” Referring to what he had heard from his “dear friends,” the Rebbe wrote bitterly in his diary, “Endless tears of disappointment accompanied my first bedtime Shema on American soil.”
Kranzler had the same feeling when he saw the excitement portside. “I thought to myself that after the novelty has worn off and the curiosity is stilled, the rabbi too will be forgotten.”[[19: The Wonder Rabbi.]] Avraham Hecht was on the organizing committee for the Rebbe’s welcome. “Most saw the Rebbe as an erliche Yid, a sincere Jew, but they did not take him seriously. They laughed at him.” The Rebbe’s proposals seemed improbable; in the US he would be starting over again from nothing. “Anyone else would have retired at this point. But in reality, the Rebbe was just starting his work at the age of sixty.”[[20: Author’s interview with Rabbi Avraham Hecht.]] Hecht grew up in an immigrant community in Brooklyn. “Some had run away from the [Russian] army, others were simple tradesman. There was little Jewish learning and few Torah scholars.” When the Rebbe set up shop in the Greystone Hotel, he had few followers. “A few of us would cross the bridge from Brooklyn. We used to walk two, three hours on Shabbat to ensure the Rebbe had a minyan.”
It was a period of decline for Orthodox Jewry, writes historian Jonathan Sarna. Starting in 1924, the flow of immigrants dried up as the US established quotas for European immigrants. “With the end of immigration, its supply of pious newcomers was shut off at the very moment when the children of the those who immigrated years earlier seemed to abandon the movement’s teachings.”[[21: Professor Jonathan Sarna, American Judaism (Yale University, 2004), 227.]] A 1935 survey found that seventy-five percent of New York Jews had not attended synagogue in the previous year. In 1938 in San Francisco, only eighteen percent were affiliated with a congregation. When they did attend, many chose the new American styles of Jewish observance that were gaining steam. The Reform movement was already well entrenched, rooted in nineteenth-century German immigration. When Russian and Polish immigrants from Orthodox backgrounds came in large numbers starting in the 1880s, they loosened their ties with tradition and joined the growing Conservative movement. At the time of the Rebbe’s arrival, that was the fastest-growing segment of the Jewish community.[[22: In 1913, there were just twenty-two synagogues that were members of the Conservative association United Synagogue. In 1929, that number had grown tenfold to 229. In the postwar era, the Conservative movement grew even more, fueled by the move of many Jews from the urban core to the suburbs. Sarna, American Judaism, 238.]] Orthodoxy was in free fall. Jewish sociologist Marshal Sklare described its decline as “a case study in institutional decay.”[[23: Marshall Sklare, Conservative Judaism: An American Religious Movement.]]
There was a small core of rabbis and community members working tirelessly to kick-start traditional Judaism in the US. Yeshivah Torah Vodaath,[[24: Considered by many the “mother yeshivah of American Jewry,” it was founded in 1918 in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.]] led by the visionary educator Rabbi Shraga Feivel Mendlowitz,[[25: Rabbi Shraga Feivel Mendlowitz (1886–1948) immigrated to the US in 1913, first to Philadelphia and then to Scranton, where he headed the Talmud Torah. In 1921, he became principal of Torah Vodaath. It was a small school at that time, but under his leadership it expanded to include a high school and college-level yeshivah program. By 1936, it had 751 students and “spawned several imitators and competitors,” Professor Jonathan Sarna writes. Rabbi Mendlowitz was instrumental in establishing Torah Umesorah in 1944 and supported other Torah institutions as well. See Sarna, American Judaism, 228. For a full biography, see Yonoson Rosenblum, Reb Shraga Feivel: The Life and Times of Rabbi Shraga Feivel Mendlowitz, the Architect of Torah in America (Brooklyn, NY: Mesorah Publications, 2001).]] was fostering a new generation of Jews dedicated to the classic yeshivah-style learning. Rabbi Mendlowitz was a Hungarian immigrant with a chasidic background, devoted to developing a European-style yeshivah in a new land. The yeshivah blended chasidic warmth and traditional Lithuanian scholarship. As historian Jeffry Gurock writes, “The Hungarian-born Mendlowitz came from an environment in which the teachings of Rabbi Moshe Sofer still loomed large,” Rabbi Sofer being “the foremost arch resister in Europe to any Jewish concessions with the changing secular world.”[[26: Jeffrey Gurock, Orthodox Jews in America (Indiana University Press, 2009), chap. 6.]] Rabbi Mendlowitz did make some compromises with modernity, but they “were subtle ones.” Other yeshivas were slowly sprouting, including Chaim Berlin and Mesivta Tiferes Yerushalayim.
At the same time, Rabbi Dov Revel was developing an institution with a new approach in Manhattan. Originally named Yeshivah College, later rebranded Yeshivah University, its goal was to integrate high-level Jewish study with college-level secular studies. Rabbi Mendlowitz was advocating insularity, while Rabbi Revel, who was himself an outstanding scholar and graduate of the great yeshivas of Europe, wanted to prod Orthodoxy into the cultural mainstream. As Sarna writes, American Orthodox Jews looked at Rabbi Revel’s achievements “as a symbol that simultaneously reflected and legitimated their own quest to uphold and maintain Judaism and to adapt it to their new homeland.”[[27: Sarna, American Judaism, 232.]]
Other important Orthodox institutions emerged.[[28: For an overview of the growth of traditional Judaism, see Menachem Keren-Katz, “The Haredization of American Orthodoxy in the Early Twentieth Century” in Tradition, Winter 2022.]] The Orthodox Union, founded in 1898, united many Orthodox synagogues and began to centralize kosher supervision in the US. Young Israel, founded in 1912, lured younger Jews back toward observance and was expanding its network of congregations. Mizrachi, the religious Zionist organization, was launched in 1914, and the more traditionalist Agudath Israel was established by Rabbi Eliezer Silver in the 1930s.
By the time the Rebbe arrived, there was a cornucopia of rabbinical groups. Agudas Harabonim[[29: Agudas Harabonim, the Union of Orthodox Rabbis, was founded in 1902 by European rabbinic scholars.]] unified rabbis with backgrounds in the European yeshivas. The Rabbinical Council of America[[30: The Rabbinical Council of America (RCA) was founded in 1923 to unify American Orthodox rabbis, primarily graduates of Yeshivah University. It has close ties with the Orthodox Union.]] linked graduates of Yeshivah University. America did not boast world-class Jewish scholars like in Europe, but Rabbis Silver and Eliyahu Henkin were shining exceptions. In the years leading up to World War II, some notable Torah scholars immigrated to the US,[[31: US immigration law had a special clause permitting the entry of clergy, which facilitated the immigration of these scholars. See Jonathan Sarna and Zev Eleff, “The Immigration Clause that Transformed Orthodox Judaism in the United States,” in American Jewish History, vol. 101, available at: https://www.brandeis.edu/hornstein/sarna/immigration/Sarna,%20Eleff%20IMMIGRATION%20CLAUSE%20THAT%20TRANSFORMED%20ORTHODOX%20JUDAISM.pdf.]] including Rabbis Moshe Feinstein,[[32: Rabbi Feinstein was rosh yeshivah of Mesivta Tifereth Jerusalem, Rabbi Soloveitchik was rosh yeshivah of Yeshivah University, and Rabbi Kamenetsky was rosh yeshivah of Torah Vodaath. Rabbi Breuer became the leader of the German Jewish community in Washington Heights, Manhattan.]] Joseph Soloveitchik, Yaakov Kamenetsky, and Joseph Breuer. Other prominent rabbis[[33: Other prominent scholars arrived in the US after the Rebbe, including Rabbi Aharon Kotler, who founded Beth Medrash Govoha in Lakewood, and Rabbi Moshe Shatzkes (the Lomzer Rav) and Rabbi Dovid Lifshitz, who both joined Yeshivah University as roshei yeshivah.]] found sanctuary in the US when the war broke out in Europe. It took time for their influence to grow, but ultimately, the immigration of these rabbis contributed to establishing the US as a center of Jewish scholarship.
The primary strategy of the time was defensive, to shore up the small core of observant Jews and stem the Orthodox attrition that would not abate for years. That mindset was echoed in the speech of Rabbi Moshe Soloveichik at the ordination ceremony at Yeshivah University in 1940. He called on the newly minted rabbis to “resist the onslaught” and to “expand and increase the study of Torah.” He urged them to “salvage what was left and continue the long legacy for which our ancestors gave their lives.”[[34: Rabbi Moshe Soloveichik (1879–1941) was the son of the legendary Rabbi Chaim Soloveitchik and rosh yeshivah of Yeshivah University. Speech cited in HaPardes, May 1940. HaPardes was a monthly rabbinic magazine that started publishing in the 1920s in Chicago and later moved to New York.]]
The Rebbe’s strategy was the opposite; he chose to go on the offensive. His proclamation, “America iz nisht aderesh – America is no different,” challenged the prevailing attitude. He didn’t want to just bolster the small religious community, but to fundamentally change the direction of American Jewish life.
Nineteen-year-old yeshivah student Herschel Fogelman was at the pier when the Rebbe disembarked. He describes the mentality of the small Orthodox world overwhelmed by attrition, struggling to balance the freedoms of America with loyalty to tradition. “We, the students of Torah Vodaath, felt like pioneers in a wagon train on the prairie surrounded by Indians. The Rebbe’s arrival was like the calvary had finally come to save us. But the Rebbe didn’t just want to chase off the Indians, he wanted to conquer the whole continent.”[[35: Author’s interview with Herschel Fogelman.]]
In America, the Rebbe would have to start again from scratch – for the third time – in a totally different environment. Immense sums of money were needed to help Jews stranded in Europe and to transform Judaism in the US, but the Rebbe lacked affluent supporters. Rabbi Adin Even-Israel Steinsaltz explained the difficulties the Rebbe faced. “There were Jews who were sentimental to traditional Judaism, but unfortunately, they did not have financial resources. Those who had money did not have that sense of longing for traditional Judaism,” nor did they perceive the urgency of the threat in Europe. Steinsaltz says that during this period, every contribution was vital. The Rebbe even wrote “a personal letter to someone who made a donation of fifty dollars.”[[36: Ad Bli Dai [Hebrew] ( Jerusalem: Maggid, 2021).]]
Though large crowds had turned out to welcome the Rebbe, the actual number of Chabad Chasidim was small. Only a handful of Chasidim lived in the upscale Crown Heights neighborhood where the Rebbe would soon set up his headquarters. Steinsaltz notes that when he settled there, it was still hard to get a minyan in the middle of the day. “There were so few Chabad members that someone would stand on the street to recruit the tenth man for afternoon prayers.”[[37: Rabbi Adin Even-Yisrael Steinsaltz, My Rebbe ( Jerusalem: Maggid, 2014), chap. 5.]]
The Rebbe had announced the founding of the American Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim on his first day in the US. Mordechai Fisher, one of the yeshivah’s original students, says the Rebbe told Rabbi Jacobson that day, “If you do not promise me that you will open the yeshivah, I will not go to bed to sleep tonight.” The next morning, Jacobson began enlisting students. “He spoke to me and to this one and that one, and we all decided to volunteer to become the nucleus of the new yeshivah.” Studies began a week later in Congregation Oneg Shabbat in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn; its members had converted a house into a shul. Avraham Hecht recalls the modest start: “Benches and tables were dragged down to the basement. A kitchen was speedily constructed in the homey yeshivah hall, transforming a dingy cellar into a room fit for use.”[[38: Rabbi Abraham Hecht, My Spiritual Journey (Brooklyn, NY: 2006).]]
The first group of students was made up of Americans who transferred from other New York yeshivas and gravitated to Chabad.[[39: Students from New York yeshivas, in particular Torah Vodaath, had been studying chasidic philosophy with Rabbi Jacobson and became attached to Chabad. Some joined the new yeshivah right away, and others transferred in the coming years. Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1988), chap. 29.]] A few students who had studied in Otwock, such as Hecht, also joined. Rabbi Mordechai Mentlik, one of the outstanding Polish scholars, was appointed dean of the yeshivah, a position he held until his passing in 1987. The group was very small, Hecht says. “There was just a minyan.”
On the day the studies started, the Rebbe addressed the students.[[40: The Rebbe took an active interest in the students’ progress. The administration sent him regular reports and he met regularly with the yeshivah staff.]] “Today is the seventh day since divine providence brought me to America to transform America into a haven for Torah.”[[41: Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, 5700, chap. 9.]] The Rebbe spoke of the unique purpose in life that each individual has and emphasized the importance of Torah study. He reminded them that in Europe the yeshivah student was “recognizable by his outward appearance. They were not embarrassed and didn’t hide their distinctness.” By contrast, in America some rabbis and yeshivah students “hide their distinguishing face” and are wary of being outwardly Jewish by “wearing tzitzit, peyos, and a beard.” Steinsaltz says, “Shaving one’s beard was emblematic of modernity.If Jews wanted to fit in, they would have to look the part. The Rebbe demanded that the students in the yeshivah grow beards. At the time it was like he asked them to grow tails. No young people wore beards.”[[42: Steinsaltz, My Rebbe, chap. 5; Farbrengens with Rabbi Steinsaltz.]]
For the first few months in America, the Rebbe resided in the Greystone Hotel in Manhattan, except for an interlude for the holiday of Passover in Lakewood, New Jersey. The Chasidim began searching for a permanent home for the Rebbe in the summer of 1940.[[43: A committee was formed by Agudas Chassidei Chabad. It included Chaim Kramer, Avraham Dovber Kramer, Dovber Chaskind, and Rabbis Shlomo Aharon Kazanofsky, Shmuel Levitin, Moshe Dovber Rivkin, Eli Simpson, Yisrael Jacobson, and Menachem Mendel Cunin.]] Hecht says some of the Chasidim thought the most appropriate location would be a suburban town, such as Lakewood. There a yeshivah could operate with fewer distractions, less “opposition and ridicule.” But the Rebbe rejected this proposal. “He wanted to transform the religious topography of American society. This could only be accomplished if his chasidic movement was visible to the public eye.”
Instead of settling down in Brooklyn’s religious hub, Brownsville, known as the “Jerusalem of America,” the Rebbe selected prestigious Crown Heights. A three-story brownstone[[44: A local doctor commissioned renowned architect Edwin Kline to create a home and clinic for him. It was completed in 1936, but the doctor was indicted and the bank seized the property. For more on the property’s history, see Andrew Silverstein, “How 770 Eastern Parkway Became the World’s Most Recognizable Jewish Building,” available at: https://forward.com/culture/474642/how-770-eastern-parkway-chabad-lubavitch-rebbe-schneerson-history-jewish/#:~:text=Around%20the%20world%2C%20construction%20is,on%20every%20continent%20except%20Antarctica.]] was purchased on the main thoroughfare of Eastern Parkway.[[45: The house had an elevator, an important feature for the Rebbe, since his mobility was limited.]] “It is a beautiful residence in a wonderful location,” described Rabbi Shmuel Levitin, “with room for the Rebbe’s needs, including offices, a library, and synagogue like there was in Lubavitch that will be renovated and that will welcome all of anash.”[[46: Letter to the Chabad community in the United States dated 12 Av, 5700 (August 16, 1940), the day of the purchase. Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit, 174.]] Chasidim began to refer to it simply as “Seven-Seventy” after its address. With time, its iconic profile would become a symbol of Chabad and replicas would be constructed around the world.[[47: Replicas have been built in over thirty locations around the world, including Australia, Israel, California, and Texas. The profile of 770 is also used in the creation of Judaica. See Barbara Eldredge, “This Crown Heights Building Has Doppelgängers All Over the Globe,” available at: https://www.brownstoner.com/architecture/770-eastern-parkway-brooklyn-chabad-lubavitch-building-crown-heights/.]]
Around the corner was President Street, lined with mansions owned by the Jewish nouveau riche. Down the block loomed the Brooklyn Jewish Center, the largest Conservative congregation in the US, known as the “shul with a pool.” Its rabbi and other community leaders opposed the Rebbe planting his headquarters in their midst. Hecht says, “They lobbied city hall and local congressmen to block the Rebbe from moving to Eastern Parkway.” That didn’t faze the Rebbe. “He was unimpressed by those who wanted to disrupt his plans.” At the time, there were only three Chabad families living in the neighborhood, but Crown Heights would become a base to reach out to all kinds of Jews, secular and religious.[[48: The three families were Chaskind, Popak, and Gordon. Charles Roth.]] “For a chasidic Jew, in particular a Rebbe, to move into Crown Heights at that time was like something from a different planet,” says chasidic scholar Michoel Seligson.[[49: Ibid.]]
Just after Chai Elul (September 22, 1940), the birthday of Rabbis Yisrael Baal Shem Tov and Schneur Zalman, the Rebbe moved into his newly acquired home.[[50: The purchase was completed by Agudas Chassidei Chabad on August 16, 1940 (12 Av, 5700).]] The Chasidim were delighted that the Rebbe finally had a permanent residence. “I cannot describe the happiness and joy that we saw on the faces of everyone,” says Avraham Pariz.[[51: Letter from Avraham Pariz, reprinted in Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit, chap. 35.]] Avraham Hecht says the enthusiasm of the crowd embodied “the hopes and dreams for Chasidism in America.”[[52: Hecht, My Spiritual Journey.]] But the joy was tinged by anxiety over the war. “While Europe was being consumed by merciless flames, a new reality was taking place. Destruction and construction were occurring simultaneously in two distant lands.”
It was this destruction that preoccupied the Rebbe as he planted roots in the US. His attention was on the fate of the Jews in Europe, both those in Poland and Russia. Though there was anxiety over the fate of European Jews under German rule, few imagined that Germany would soon embark on a policy of Jewish genocide. As the Rebbe reflected after his arrival, “G-d dispatched us here with a dual mission to American Jewry, to their rabbis and lay leaders. The first mission is to urge them to do whatever is possible to sustain and save the Jews abroad.” Strides had been made, “however, all of this is far from enough.” The Jews in Europe were suffering acutely. “Their spirits are so crushed by the cruel bondage that they have not the strength to cry out.” The Rebbe called for direct assistance to the Jews in Europe and to “increase the possibilities of immigration.”[[53: Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, 5702 (Brooklyn, NY: 2017), chap. 13.]]
“The second mission which divine providence has placed upon me,” the Rebbe continued, “is the furtherance of G-d-fearing Torah study and proper Jewish education.” As historian Shalom Ber Levin writes,[[54: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, Introduction.]] “From the moment the Rebbe escaped from Warsaw, this became a life’s purpose: not to forget, or rest, until he could save his students.” It would be an almost impossible task. Immigration to the US had slowed to a trickle after Congress supported the Johnson-Reed Act in 1924. The State Department, its hallways filled with bureaucrats with little sympathy, if not outright hostility, to Jews in Europe, heavily regulated immigration. While still in Poland, the Rebbe had instructed his students to flee to nearby Lithuania.[[55: For a detailed overview of the yeshivah during the war years, see Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2001), chap. 54–62.]] Afterward, during his brief interlude in Riga, he turned to major Jewish groups asking them to help save the Jews still stranded in Poland. The Rebbe looked for any avenue to rescue those still in Europe.
America was still neutral and would not enter the war until the attack on Pearl Harbor in December of 1941. Hopeful that the US would provide sanctuary, the Rebbe tried securing visas and raising large sums of money to transport the students. From Riga, before departing to the US, he urged Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson to “act expeditiously and as soon as possible”[[56: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter dated 14 Tevet, 5700 (December 26, 1939). The letter from Riga was following up on a telegram the Rebbe had sent to Jacobson.]] to lobby the State Department for visas. After landing in the US, the Rebbe addressed the “Jews of America” in a letter, imploring them to rescue the students in Europe from “a great threat to their lives. Help me save the students!”[[57: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter dated Nisan 5700 (April 1940).The appeal was addressed “To my beloved brothers and sisters, the Jews of United States.” The Rebbe listed Eretz Yisrael and America as appropriate locations to resettle the students.]] The Rebbe turned to friends across the globe to find avenues of rescue. He wrote to Jewish leaders in Palestine, including Chief Rabbi Yitzchak Herzog, asking for help with procuring immigration affidavits to Eretz Yisrael. In June 1940, the Rebbe contacted Shanghai’s chief rabbi, Meir Ashkenazi, about the possibility of escape via Russia and China. “When you receive the names of the students, can you arrange transit visas for them?”[[58: Rabbi Meir Ashkenazi (1892–1954) served as chief rabbi of Shanghai from 1926 to 1949. He studied in Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim in Lubavitch; later he was a rabbi in Harbin and then moved to Shanghai. After the war, he relocated to Brooklyn, where he passed away. See Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter to Rabbi Meir Ashkenazi dated 26 Sivan, 5700 ( June 4, 1940). In the same letter, the Rebbe lauds Ashkenazi for establishing a Talmud Torah with Jewish education programs for refugees who arrived in Shanghai. “You should make every effort to organize programs for the youth, designed for the needs of each group,” he wrote, possibly referring to the fact that refugees were arriving from different countries, speaking different languages and with varied levels of Jewish knowledge. For more on Rabbi Ashkenazi’s life, see Yehuda Geberer, “Shliach to Shanghai: The Life & Heroics of Rabbi Meir Ashkenazi,” podcast available at: https://jsoundbites.podbean.com/e/the-shliach-to-shanghai-the-life-heroics-of-rabbi-meir-ashkenazi/.]] He explored options in countries as far away as Paraguay and Cuba.
Meanwhile, the route to safety via the Far East was discovered when two yeshivah students in Lithuania realized there was no visa requirement to travel to Curacao.[[59: Two students with Dutch backgrounds, Nathan Gutwirth and Leo Sternheim, came up with the plan to escape Europe via Japan. Interview with Rabbi Yisroel Chanovitz by Rabbi Avrohom Holzberg of Kfar Chabad magazine in which Holzberg spoke with students of the yeshivah in Shanghai. See also Steven Lapidus, “Memoirs of a Refugee: The Travels and Travails of Rabbi Pinchas Hirschsprung,” available at: file:///C:/Users/rabbi/Downloads/editorcjs,+Vol+27,+8,+Lapidus.pdf.]] Jan Zwartendyk, the Dutch honorary consul in Kovno, agreed to stamp the students’ passports, “No visa required to enter Curacao.” Based on this, Chiune Sugihara, the Japanese consul in the Lithuanian capital, started to issue transit visas for Jews via Japan. Skepticism on the success of this route reined amongst the yeshivah students in Lithuania. Some were fearful that sending students via Communist Russia could be dangerous.[[60: Russia’s policy of hostility toward religious observance caused prominent rabbis, including Rabbis Chaim Ozer Grodzinski and Aharon Kotler, to advise against traveling via Russia. See Marc Shapiro, “The Mir Yeshivah’s Incredible Escape to Shanghai,” audio lectures available at: https://torahinmotion.org/programs/e-tim-the-mir-yeshivas-incredible-escape-to-shanghai.]] Earlier, the Rebbe had instructed his students to seek the advice of the Amshinover Rebbe, Rabbi Shimon Kalish, should communication with him be interrupted.[[61: While in Riga after leaving Warsaw, the Rebbe sent Rabbi Yehoshua Bick to serve as the mashpia (spiritual mentor) of the yeshivah in Vilnius. He instructed him to seek counsel with the Amshinover Rebbe if needed. Interview with Michoel Seligson by Rabbi Avrohom Holzberg of Kfar Chabad magazine; Seligson’s father was one of the students in Shanghai.]] Rabbi Kalish instructed the students to flee east via Russia, and when the Rebbe was notified, he endorsed the plan.
At first, the Rebbe secured US visas for fifty-two students. The plan was for them to come directly to the US, but as the war intensified, travel across the Atlantic became impossible. The only way open was eastward, through Russia and Japan. The Chabad students did not hesitate. Chaim Meir Bukiet recalls, “It was the students of Tomchei Temimim who broke the ice.” The Russian official responsible for permitting travel via Russia was named Schlossberg. He was a Communist, but his father had been a Chabad Chasid. When he saw the bearded students, he realized they were from the Lubavitcher yeshivah. “We were terrified,” Bukiet recalls. But Schlossberg reassured them and told them not to worry. He arranged visas and asked them to get a tallit for his father.[[62: Interview with Rabbi Chaim Meir Bukiet by Rabbi Avrohom Holzberg of Kfar Chabad magazine.]]
One of the students, Herschel Fuchs, says, “The Russians wanted to show the world they were not so terrible and were permitting the transit of students throughout Russia.”[[63: Interview with Rabbi Herschel Fuchs by Rabbi Avrohom Holzberg of Kfar Chabad magazine. Fuchs was a student in the yeshivah in Poland and Shanghai. After the war he was a teacher in the Lubavitcher yeshivah in Brooklyn.]] He adds that they needed foreign currency; the Russians demanded about five hundred dollars per student ($10,000 today). The Rebbe had to secure the funds quickly, before the window of escape closed.
The Rebbe sent appeals and emissaries to collect money across the US. He emphatically petitioned Rabbi Dovid Rabinowitz in Boston: “It’s an emergency. We have no idea what will happen tomorrow.”[[64: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter dated 3 Tamuz, 5700 ( July 9, 1940).]] Despite the difficulties, the Rebbe couldn’t ignore the pleas for help. “What can I do? They are turning to me from every side.” The fate of the students impacted his own fragile health. “Saving the students is causing me pain and anguish. I sent a large amount of money,” he wrote. He pleaded with Moshe Starkenstein, a philanthropist in Detroit, “The cost is $430[[65: In addition to the funds remitted to the Russian government, there were other expenses, bringing the total to around five hundred dollars each.]] per student. I am trying to save at least fifty of them. We cannot wait, it’s pikuach nefesh – we are saving the lives of great scholars, the best of the Jewish people.” A month later, the Rebbe turned to Wichita, Kansas, businessman Tzvi Hirsch Gore in desperation: “I received a telegram from the students in Vilnius. The Soviets are demanding another
       5,040(5,040 (5,040(
     
100,000 today), and the transit visas are only valid for a short time. Please have mercy on my students and provide a meaningful amount now.”[[66: Gore was a Russian Jew who succeeded in the oil business in Wichita. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter dated January 6, 1941 (7 Tevet, 5701).]]
The Rebbe even appealed to Moshe Zalman Feiglin in far-off Australia. “I’ve secured US visas for one hundred students and fifty families with a cost of upward of $500 each.”[[67: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter dated 15 Tevet, 5701 ( January 14, 1941). It seems the number of visas fluctuated as the US changed its policy.]] The Rebbe wrote that funds had already been transferred to save thirty students, but he was unable to find the money for the rest. “I am in great pain and disheartened that we are unable to save these students.” When the Rebbe could not raise the funds in time, he borrowed them. He told a supporter in Pittsburgh, “We are seeking a loan. They have visas and if we don’t cable the funds in four days, they could lose permission to travel. This is on top of the five thousand dollars we sent last week and the previous payments that were made.”[[68: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter to Yaakov Schector of Pittsburgh dated 14 Tevet, 5700 ( January 13, 1941). In the letter, the Rebbe also thanks Schector for helping to establish a Ladies Auxiliary in Pittsburgh and for supporting the Chabad yeshivas.]] The debts were weighing on him. He confided to one of his followers that he was taking out one loan to pay another.[[69: Igrot Kodesh 5:243, letter to Binyamin Disin dated 20 Tevet, 5701 ( January 19, 1941).]]
The students headed east by train to Moscow, where they expected to receive their visas at the US Embassy. Tzvi Kotlarsky says that until that time, only individuals had trickled through Moscow; they were the first large group. “The US ambassador had never had a request for such a large number of visas.” Indeed, few people ever left Russia. “He said it was impossible to process them in the three short days we were in Moscow.”[[70: Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, chap. 56.]] Instead he suggested they obtain the visas at the US embassy in Tokyo, since they were traveling to the US via Japan. The Russians put them up in upscale hotels, and the students spent a few idyllic days in Russia’s capital.[[71: During the stop in Moscow, the students visited the Choral Synagogue, the main congregation in Moscow. Avraham Garfinkel recalls that local Jews could not believe that a Jew could depart from Russia and feared conversing with the students. They made contact there with some Chabad Chasidim “who we secretly gave siddurim and chasidic publications.”]] From there they took the trans-Siberian railway to Vladivostok and then to an ocean crossing to Japan. Avraham Garfinkel recalled, “The trip took two weeks across Siberia, and then we stayed three days in a hotel in Vladivostok.” When they finally arrived in Kobe, Japan, the small Jewish community there opened its doors to them. They had established a synagogue in 1912, and by the onset of the war there were one thousand Jews in Kobe.[[72: Tamar Engel, “The Jews of Kobe,” available at: https://xenon.stanford.edu/~tamar/Kobe/Kobe.html. Today Jewish life continues in Kobe; see: https://jewishkobeosaka.com/.]] The first group of Chabad students arrived in early 1941.[[73: Rabbi S.D. Raichik, “The Lubavitcher Yeshivah in Kobe, Japan 1,” available at: chabadofla.com/1409449.]]
At the US embassy in Tokyo, they discovered that US policy had changed. Their visas were revoked, and unable to travel to the US, they were stranded in Japan. In New York, the Rebbe reached out to unsuccessfully to other countries, such as Paraguay, Canada, and Palestine, to provide them refuge.
Others took the route to Kobe, including two hundred students of the Mir Yeshivah led by their rosh yeshivah, Rabbi Chaim Shmuelevitz.[[74: For an overview of the history of the Mir Yeshivah in Shanghai, see Marc Shapiro, “The Mir Yeshivah’s Incredible Escape to Shanghai,” audio lectures available at: https://torahinmotion.org/programs/e-tim-the-mir-yeshivas-incredible-escape-to-shanghai.]] Seven months later, in August, the Japanese government relocated all the yeshivah students from Kobe to the international city of Shanghai.[[75: For more, see Rabbi S.D. Raichik, “The Lubavitcher Yeshivah in Shanghai,” available at: chabadofla.com/1409453]] It had a substantial Jewish community, founded by Sephardic Jews lured by business opportunities in the nineteenth century and augmented by refugees from Russia and other European countries. Rabbi Meir Ashkenazi, a Chabad Chasid, was the Ashkenazi chief rabbi. He arranged for the large Beth Aharon Synagogue, built in 1927,[[76: It was constructed by Silas Hardoon (1851–1931), an affluent assimilated Jew, in memory of his father Aharon. The facility sat unused until the arrival of the yeshivah students.]] to be assigned to the Mir Yeshivah. The Chabad yeshivah with just some forty students rented another location, continuing its classic mode of study[[77: The Chabad yeshivas integrated the study of Talmud and chasidic philosophy. The Mir Yeshivah followed the classic Lithuanian mode of study that focused almost entirely on Talmud, accentuated by musar (ethics).]] as in Poland.
Unlike the Mir Yeshivah, whose staff had come along, the Chabad students were isolated, as no teachers or administrators had joined them. Communication with the Rebbe in New York was nearly impossible, especially after the attack on Pearl Harbor.[[78: There was very occasional, limited communication via Stockholm in neutral Sweden between the students in Shanghai and the Rebbe in New York. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, communication became almost impossible. Rabbi Yisrael Zuber, a Chabad Chasid who served as the rabbi in Stockholm, facilitated the connection. Students would refer to the Rebbe as “Davidson” (son of Sholom Dovber). See interview by Mishpacha magazine, November 2010. For more on the Stockholm connection, see Igrot Kodesh 5:41.]] Cut off from the Jewish world, they had to fend for themselves. One of the students, Chaim Sapochinksy, recalls, “It was hard for us, the Lubavitcher students in Shanghai, because we were without a Rebbe or maggid shiur (teacher). But we were Chasidim…we tried to strengthen ourselves.”[[79: Interview by Mishpacha magazine, November 2010.]]
The war years in Shanghai were grueling. Initially, Jewish refugees were permitted to live anywhere in the city, but in 1943 the Japanese created a Jewish ghetto in the Hongkou district. The Japanese rule was cruel[[80: The ghetto was administered by Japanese official Sgt. Kano Ghoya. He called himself the “king of the Jews” and treated the refugees brutally. See Henny Bauer’s video testimony, available at: https://sfi.usc.edu/video/chhenny-bauergen.]] and food was scarce; there were times when the students were barely surviving. To help, the US-based Agudas Harabonim organized a rescue committee, the Vaad Hatzalah,[[81: Established in 1939 to assist yeshivah students and rabbis in war-torn Europe, it was originally named “Emergency Committee for War-Torn Yeshivas.” When the route via Japan opened, the Vaad Hatzalah raised money to transport students of the Mir Yeshivah and support them in Japan and Shanghai. Later in the war, as the scope of the Holocaust became known, it expanded its work to save Jews in Hungary and other countries. In the postwar era, it took a leading role in helping refugees. It was led by Rabbis Eliezer Silver, Avraham Kalmanovich, and Aharon Kotler. See “An Inventory to the Vaad Hatzala Collection, 1940–1963,” available at: https://archives.yu.edu/xtf/view?docId=ead/vaad/vaad.xml;query=;brand=default; Alex Grobman, Battling for Souls: The Vaad Hatzala Rescue Committee in Post-War Europe ( Jersey City, NJ: Ktav); Efraim Zuroff, “Rabbis’ Relief and Rescue: A Case Study of the Activities of the Vaad ha-Hatzala (Rescue Committee) of the American Orthodox Rabbis, 1942–1943,” available at: https://www.museumoftolerance.com/education/archives-and-reference-library/online-resources/simon-wiesenthal-center-annual-volume-3/annual-3-chapter-5.html.]] which launched a national fundraising campaign to support the students. They sent funds to the Mir Yeshivah and some additional smaller yeshivas but intentionally excluded the Chabad students from the life-saving disbursements, even as many donations came from the chasidic community.[[82: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 8, letter to Shlomo Palmar dated 11 Adar, 5704 (March 6, 1944). Palmar was a Chabad supporter in Chicago.]] “Telegrams from the Vaad Hatzalah in New York were sent to Shanghai instructing that the money be given to all students of Torah except Chabad,” says Chaim Bukiet.[[83: Interview with Rabbi Chaim Meir Bukiet by Rabbi Avrohom Holzberg of Kfar Chabad magazine.]]
After a fundraiser in Chicago raised a large sum, many of the donations coming from chasidic donors, the Rebbe pleaded for a portion of the funds to be used to help the Chabad students in Shanghai, but his fervent request went unheeded.[[84: In the same letter, the Rebbe states that he is under tremendous financial strain and has debts totaling more than $20,000 (over $350,000 today).]] The Rebbe had received a report via Stockholm that described the refugee situation as “catastrophic. We must save them from hunger and sickness.”[[85: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 8, letter to Shlomo Palmar dated 11 Adar, 5704 (March 6, 1944).]]
“We were in a very serious physical condition,” recalls Bukiet. “Our clothes were in tatters and we had barely anything to eat except for a bit of rice every day.” The transfer of funds to Shanghai was very challenging with the city under Japanese occupation. Sending money from the US was illegal, considered “trading with the enemy.”[[86: Unlike Vaad Hatzalah, other US Jewish organizations such as the JDC were unwilling to transfer funds to Jewish refugees in Shanghai. This contravened US law banning the transfer of funds to areas under enemy control. In the eyes of Vaad Hatzalah, this was a matter of life and death, and Jewish law dictates pikuach nefesh docheh et hakol –to save a life, all is permitted (other than taking other lives). In this case, the Vaad Hatzalah believed that this Jewish principle trumped US law, a concept that was foreign to the more secular Jewish groups.]] There was great risk that the Japanese would arrest someone for receiving funds from the US. Bukiet says the Vaad Hatzalah was one of the few that found a way of moving money through neutral countries such as Switzerland and Uruguay.[[87: Other methods were also used. Local Jews provided funds for the yeshivah, and Vaad Hatzalah would reimburse their friends or relatives in other countries. Communications between Rabbi Shmuelevitz and Vaad Hatzalah was done in code. For a detailed of view of these efforts, see Efraim Zuroff, “Rabbis’ Relief and Rescue: A Case Study of the Activities of the Vaad ha-Hatzala (Rescue Committee) of the American Orthodox Rabbis, 1942–1943,” available at: https://www.museumoftolerance.com/education/archives-and-reference-library/online-resources/simon-wiesenthal-center-annual-volume-3/annual-3-chapter-5.html.]] In 1943, the Vaad Hatzalah was able to convince Henry Morgenthau, secretary of the treasury, to make an exception to US law and permit the transmission of funds to the students in Shanghai.[[88: Rabbi Avraham Kalmanowitz, one of the leaders of Vaad Hatzalah, convinced Morgenthau to make this exception. David Kranzler, Thy Brother’s Blood (Brooklyn, NY: Mesorah Publications, 1987), chap. 4.]]
The war prevented communication between the students held in enemy-controlled Shanghai and Chabad in New York. After the Japanese surrender, contact was reestablished, and only then did the hardships endured by the Chabad students become clear. The students sent a heartbreaking letter[[89: Letter from the yeshivah students in Shanghai to the Rashag dated 26 Tishrei, 5706 (October 3, 1945). The first part of the letter provides a general review of the yeshivah and its academic achievements, noting that it continued the same mode of study as when the yeshivah was in Poland. The second part outlines the polices of the Vaad Hatzalah and states that not only did it discriminate against Chabad students, but also against the Amshinover Rebbe. “They did not provide the Amshinover Rebbe with funds, claiming he was not a yeshivah student, while providing funding to the Litvish [Lithuanians] who are far from that [yeshivah students]. Only after harsh protest did it change.” This letter revealed the full details of the Vaad Hatzalah’s scandalous policy to Chabad leaders in New York. This prompted the New York rabbis to write to Chabad leaders in Israel asking them to meet with leading scholars of the Lithuanian yeshivah community in Israel to share their distress about what had occurred in Shanghai. They asked them to rein in some of the antagonistic activities of the leaders of Vaad Hatzalah toward Chabad. See Rabbi Chaim Dalfin, Lakewood and Lubavitch (Brooklyn, NY: Jewish Enrichment Press, 2018), 19.]] to the Rashag detailing Vaad Hatzalah’s conduct. The letter explained that in December of 1942, all funds to Chabad were cut off by the Vaad Hatzalah. Afterward, “with great difficulty, and after experiencing shame and embarrassment, small amounts were given to us from time to time when they saw our situation was critical and we had nothing to sustain ourselves.” One of the students, Shimon Goldman, recalled, “While the students of Mir and other yeshivas received generous stipends to help them eat and buy clothes, the students of Tomchei Temimim had to fend for themselves.”[[90: Rabbi Shimon Goldman, From Shedlitz to Safety: A Young Jew’s Story of Survival (Brooklyn, NY: 2004).]]
Bukiet recalled a miraculous story about how the hunger was somewhat alleviated. Aryeh Leib Brailovsky, a local Jew who was originally from Russia, told Rabbi Ashkenazi about an enigmatic dream that he had. “A rabbi came to me and told me, ‘My children are hungry for bread.’” Ashkenazi showed him a picture of the Rebbe. Bukiet says, “Brailovsky was startled. He told Ashkenazi that this was the rabbi he had seen in his dream.” This astonishing occurrence motivated Brailovsky to raise funds from friends and to make significant personal donations toward sustaining the yeshivah.” According to Fuchs, Brailovsky eventually became fully observant.[[91: After the war, when the Rebbe became aware of Aryeh Leib Brailovsky’s generosity, he sent a letter to Rabbi Ashkenazi asking him to express the Rebbe’s appreciation for his kindness to the students. See Igrot Kodesh, vol. 9, letter dated 12 Adar Bet, 5706.]] Rabbi Chaim Shmuelewitz, disturbed by the policies that he was instructed to follow by the Vaad Hatzalah, quietly assisted the Chabad students. Bukiet recalls, “He would try to give us some money when he could.” Trying to get around the ban of using the funds for Chabad students, Shmuelewitz invited them to join his yeshivah. Wanting to retain their unique approach to Torah study, they didn’t accept his offer. The Vaad Hatzalah policies created a controversy that remains an open wound.[[92: Rabbi Ashkenazi relocated to New York in 1948. There, members of the Vaad Hatzalah initiated a din Torah, a case in rabbinical court, against Rabbi Ashkenazi. They accused him of improperly diverting some of the funds sent during the war to Shanghai for the Mir Yeshivah, so that they went to the Chabad yeshivah students instead. Since Ashkenazi was a foreigner, he was able to pick up the funds at a neutral embassy in Shanghai and bring the money to the Mir Yeshivah. He argued that if the Japanese had discovered that the funds came from the US, which was at war with Japan at the time, he could have been killed. Because of the risk, he claimed that it was permitted to take a percentage, which he gave to the Chabad students. When Ashkenazi went to the embassy to collect the funds, he would wear takhrikhim (burial shrouds) under his clothes, fearing that if the Japanese arrested him, he would never have a proper Jewish burial. The rabbinical court ruled in Ashkenazi’s favor. See Rabbi Yosef Ashkenazi, HaRav Ashkenazi (Israel: Chazak Publishing, 2017), 193–94.]] Goldman wrote in his memoir, “We had suffered at the hands of the Poles, the Germans, the Americans – and now we suffered at the hands of religious Jews like ourselves.” Members of the Vaad Hatzalah claimed that the Rebbe had a fund for pidyon shvuyim (redemption of captives) which was set up to secretly help Jews in Russia.[[93: Members of the Vaad Hatzalah attempted to justify their actions by claiming that the Rebbe had his own fund for pidyon shvuyim. That fund’s purpose was to support Jews suffering under Communism in Soviet Russia, and it operated clandestinely. The Rebbe’s involvement with Soviet Jewry was a long-standing fact, well known to those who stood at the helm of Vaad Hatzalah. Shimon Goldman, one of the students in Shanghai, wrote in his memoir, “Some postulated that members of Vaad Hatzalah were irate over a second fund established by the Rebbe Rayatz. Called Pidyon Shvuyim, the Rebbe raised money to support Jews suffering from Nazi Germany and Communist Russia. Needless to say, the legalities of such a fund were not straightforward and this prevented the Rebbe from revealing the true nature of the fund. Neither could the Rebbe show other gedolim (prominent rabbis) an accounting of the funds that he distributed to German and Russian Jewry. Apparently, certain gedolim resented this secrecy and retaliated by excluding suffering Chabad students from the Vaad Hatzalah fund.” The Rebbe’s financial support of Russian Jews was done with the utmost secrecy, as the discovery of the transfer of funds to support religious life in Russia would have prompted the arrest of the recipients.]] The Rebbe asserted that Vaad Hatzalah were reaching out to all segments of the community, including Chasidim, claiming to take care of all yeshivah students under siege. The Shanghai students believed that the Vaad Hatzalah policy was a continuation of the enmity of the mitnagdim toward Chasidim that reached back to the time of the Vilna Gaon.[[94: Rabbi Eliyahu of Vilna, known as the Vilna Gaon, was the leading rabbinic scholar in Lithuania and the head of the mitnagdim (opponents) of Chasidism. In 1777 and again in 1781, he issued a cherem (ban of excommunication) against Chasidim. In the nineteenth century, cooperation between Chasidim and mitnagdim lowered those tensions; still, they existed with less intensity. Fuchs, one of the Shanghai students, says the unwillingness to provide funds to the Chabad yeshivas “was connected to a degree of the hostility of mitnagdim to Chasidim.” See interview with Rabbi Herschel Fuchs by Rabbi Avrohom Holzberg of Kfar Chabad magazine.]] This caused the Rebbe great anguish. In 1962, in a rare moment of candor and criticism, the seventh Rebbe confided to Rabbi Chaim Gutnick[[95: Author’s interview with Rabbi Chaim Gutnick. Gutnick was a student of the Telz Yeshivah in Lithuania who found refuge in Australia during the war, eventually becoming one of the country’s leading rabbis. He was visiting the Rebbe from Australia at the time of their conversation. See “Rabbi Chaim Gutnick talks about his youth in the Telzer Yeshivah,” video available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m2VHcb1Jzgk&t=2701s.]] that the actions of the Vaad Hatzalah members “caused my father-in-law to weep.”[[96: There is a dramatic contrast between the Rebbe and his successor, the seventh Rebbe. The Rebbe was deeply expressive, many times sharing his most intimate thoughts and feelings with others. The seventh Rebbe was much more reserved, rarely speaking of himself, making personal observations, or expressing criticism of others. Rabbi Yoel Kahn noted that the seventh Rebbe was by nature an introvert and had to transform himself to assume the position of leadership. Author’s interview with Kahn.]] In 1941, Canada allotted a small number of visas for Polish Jewish refugees in neutral countries. The Canadian Jewish community had to make the gut-wrenching decision of whom to save. Rabbi Oscar Fasman of Ottawa pleaded with the Canadian Jewish Congress to prioritize Jewish scholars. “We are saving not merely people, but a holy culture which cannot be otherwise preserved.”[[97: Steven Lapidus, “Memoirs of a Refugee: The Travels and Travails of Rabbi Pinchas Hirschsprung,” available at: file:///C:/Users/rabbi/Downloads/editorcjs,+Vol+27,+8,+Lapidus.pdf.]] When they agreed, the Rebbe[[98: The Rebbe reached out to the Polish ambassador in Tokyo, writing, “I respectfully appeal to you to kindly provide Canadian visas for the thirty-eight students of Tomchei Temimim.” The Rebbe also cabled Jewish leaders such as Rabbi Abramsky in the UK, who had apparently been involved in lobbying Canada to issue the visas, to include the Chabad students. See Igrot Kodesh 5:456.]] dispatched Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson to Canada to urge Jewish leaders to include the Chabad students.[[99: Dovid Zaklikowski, The People’s Rabbi: The Life and Legacy of Rabbi Leib Kramer (New York: 2001), part IV.]] In September 1941, visas were designated for eighty yeshivah students, including nine from Chabad. With war looming on the Pacific, passage to Canada was difficult to secure. Space was found for them on a US ship sailing from Shanghai to San Francisco. Rabbi Ashkenazi asked the students to stay in Shanghai through the holidays. The route would take them across the international date line on Yom Kippur, raising questions on when they should fast and causing some to consider waiting for the next ship.[[100: The ship’s route would have taken them across the date line on Yom Kippur, creating a halakhic dilemma regarding whether to fast one or two days. After the ship departed Shanghai, the issue became moot when it was diverted to Hong Kong, causing it to cross the date line after Yom Kippur.]] But the Rebbe insisted they depart as soon as possible, telegramming Rabbi Ashkenazi, “Please make every effort to secure berths for travel on the first ship.” Hearing this directive, the Chabad students booked passage immediately. They were joined by some of the other students of the Mir Yeshivah, but the majority decided to wait. Yitzchak Hendel took the first ship. “From the eighty students who received visas, only twenty-nine actually left.[[101: Other prominent scholars who came on that ship included Rabbi Pinchas Hirschsprung, who was appointed Montreal’s chief rabbi in 1969.]] Tragically, most of those who stayed spent the war years in Shanghai.”[[102: Some of the students of the Mir Yeshivah waited and took the next ship. Sadly, the war broke out while they were traveling, and they were interned in the Philippines, where they suffered greatly. Memoir of Rabbi Yitzchak Hendel.]] In San Francisco, the refugees were escorted by US officials to Chicago by train, and then on to Canada. They reached the Montreal train station on Friday, October 24, and the community welcomed them with open arms. Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson was also at the train station, sent by the Rebbe with instructions for the students. “He told us that we were to establish a yeshivah,” recalled Tzvi Hirsh Kotlarsky.[[103: Zaklikowski, The People’s Rabbi.]] On Saturday night, at a community reception for the students, Rabbi Jacobson surprised the crowd by announcing the opening of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim the very next day.[[104: Memoir of Rabbi Yitzchak Hendel.]] Jacobson’s unilateral announcement sparked a debate in Montreal. Local leaders had envisioned opening one yeshivah for all the students, not two separate ones. Judah Albert, president of Montreal’s Chabad synagogue, asserted, “Lubavitch has its own principles, be it in learning and teaching, be it in their general outlook to Judaism in their chasidic way of life.”[[105: There had been a community meeting upon the arrival of the students to discuss the issue, and there was a concern that supporting two institutions would be challenging. There was also a degree of opposition to the traditional religious education offered by the yeshivah. With time, the community saw its value. In 1942, S. Greenfeld, president of the Federation of Polish Jews of Canada, who had strongly opposed having two yeshivas, publicly stated that Rabbi Jacobson had been correct. See Zaklikowski, The People’s Rabbi, part IV.]] Two yeshivas opened, Tomchei Temimim and Mercaz HaTorah.[[106: By 1954, Mercaz HaTorah had 140 students. In the mid-1980s, Mercaz HaTorah merged with the newly established Yeshivah Gedolah and today is a major center of Jewish scholarship in Montreal. The Chabad yeshivah became the foundation for Chabad’s growth in the city. Today Montreal boasts a large network of Chabad institutions, including schools, synagogues, and community and campus centers. The yeshivah continues to be a center of learning till today. See Steven Lapidus, “Memoirs of a Refugee: The Travels and Travails of Rabbi Pinchas Hirschsprung,” available at: file:///C:/Users/rabbi/Downloads/editorcjs,+Vol+27,+8,+Lapidus.pdf.]] Both flourished, transforming Montreal’s Jewish community. To survive, the new yeshivah needed financial support. Hirsch Wolofsky, the opinionated editor of the Yiddish newspaper The Canadian Eagle, asked Samuel Bronfman, Seagram’s owner and Montreal’s leading Jewish philanthropist, “Are you going to help the new yeshivah?” Bronfman responded indignantly, “I’ll give them six thousand dollars ($100,000 today) to move to Toronto.” Wolofsky met with the nine students to convince them to take the offer and leave town. In response, Yitzchak Hendel says, “We told him that with time we will get to Toronto,”[[107: Memoir of Rabbi Yitzchak Hendel.]] implying that one day they would open a branch of the yeshivah there. But for now, “We’re staying and fulfilling the Rebbe’s directives.” Wolofsky continued arguing with the students. Finally, they told him, “If you have complaints, take it up with the Rebbe in New York.” Wolofsky accepted their suggestion and met with the Rebbe. “We don’t know what the Rebbe said to him, but from then on he stopped all criticism of Lubavitch,” Hendel recalls. Jacobson returned to New York, and the Rebbe sent Rabbi Shmuel Levitin to Montreal to nurture the new yeshivah through its early stages. In the months to come, the Rebbe gave Levitin detailed instructions regarding the yeshivah’s curriculum, organizational structure, and educational philosophy. The first Jews who came to Montreal were Sephardic, establishing the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue in 1768. European, mostly Russian, Jews came in the twentieth century, and by the early 1930s there were over sixty thousand Jews in Montreal, the vast majority of them Yiddish speakers. The Labor Zionist Jewish People’s School opened in 1928 as the first Jewish day school in Montreal.[[108: Goldie Morgentaler, “The Jewish People’s School of Montreal,” available at: https://www.tabletmag.com/sections/arts-letters/articles/jewish-peoples-school-montreal.]] The Yiddish Peretz School started as an afternoon program and opened a day school in 1941. These schools were a continuation of the Yiddish movements in Europe that rejected conventional Torah study and religious observance. Their curriculum consisted of Yiddish language, culture, and Zionism, and by 1941 there were 426 children enrolled in these schools.[[109: Just 1.9 percent of Canadian Jewish children were attending a Jewish day school in 1940. For an overview of Canadian Jewish life at the time that the Shanghai students arrived in Montreal, see the comprehensive survey: Louis Rosenberg, Canada’s Jews: A Social and Economic Study of Jews in Canada in the 1930s” (Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press, 1941). For more on the Yiddish schools in Montreal, see “Dr. David Fraser speaks about the history of the Jewish school question in Montreal,” available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sxQDAPN4wRw.]] The vast majority of local Jewish children, over ten thousand, attended Protestant-run public schools.[[110: In Quebec, religious groups operated public schools. At the time there was no Jewish school system, and many Jewish parents opted for the Protestant schools. With time, Jewish schools received government support. See Dorothy Zalcman Howard, “Jewish School Question,” available at: https://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/jewish-school-question#:~:text=In%201923%2C%2012%2C000%20Jewish%20children,to%20serve%20as%20school%20commissioners.]] Just thirty-six percent of Jewish children in Montreal attended a supplementary program such as a Talmud Torah.[[111: This includes children enrolled in once-a-week Sunday schools or afternoon schools. Rosenberg, Canada’s Jews, chap. 23, section 4.]] The two yeshivas founded by students from Shanghai were the first Orthodox day schools in Montreal. The Rebbe’s vision was broad: that the yeshivah should elevate Jewish life in Montreal. He challenged the students to look beyond their personal academic achievement, directing them to reach out to the community and enroll children in the yeshivah and other programs. “The primary act of tzedakah (kindness) is to go from street to street and from house to house, and gather the lilies, the pure children, and bring them to learn Torah,”[[112: Igrot Kodesh 6:198, letter dated 28 Shevat, 5702 (February 15, 1942).]] the Rebbe wrote to his followers in Montreal. The students fanned out in the city looking for students. Avraham Gerlitzky says, “If we saw a mezuzah on the doorpost of a home, we would knock and ask if they perhaps had a young child that they could send to the yeshivah.”[[113: Zaklikowski, The People’s Rabbi, part IV.]] The first day, the yeshivah had seven local students in addition to the Shanghai boys. Within two months, two dozen were enrolled. The Rebbe’s objective was clear. He viewed the influx of the yeshivah students to Montreal as divine providence. Instead of bringing them to New York to solidify the yeshivah there, they would be a beachhead for Yiddishkeit in Montreal.[[114: The yeshivah in New York had opened eighteen months earlier in March 1940 with only a small number of students. The influx of nine senior students, alumni of the yeshivah in Poland, would have enhanced it considerably.]] There were few young religious Jews in Montreal; the appearance of bearded yeshivah students was revolutionary. Like in the US, Jewish immigrants to Canada were slowly moving away from tradition. Hendel recalls they were shocked to see the level of religious observance. “In Vilnius there was an occasional Jew whose store was open on Shabbat. Here in Montreal, it was the majority.” Even some of the children of rabbis opened businesses on Shabbat. “They came to Montreal fully observant, and they did not believe that their children could follow this in the new country.” They mostly attended Orthodox synagogues, but their children received minimal Jewish schooling. The opening of the yeshivah was a turning point for Jewish education in Montreal. Now there were authentic yeshivah students in their midst, full of spirit and passion, role models for the younger generation. They initiated a variety of programs with full day and afternoon schools. They inspired many, including Arnold Dalfen. “Within two years,” he remembers, “there were 250 students learning daily in various locations.”[[115: Dovid Zaklikowski, Advorkers.]] In the summer of 1942, the yeshivah students opened a summer camp. The yeshivah continued to grow. By 1943 it was clear that a proper facility was crucial. The Rebbe sent a series of letters encouraging the local leaders to purchase a building. With the help of many, including Sam Bronfman,[[116: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 7, letter to Bronfman dated 23 Adar Bet, 5703 (March 30, 1943).]] who by now saw the value of the yeshivah, a former orphanage was acquired. Montreal’s Chief Rabbi Yehoshua Hirshorn wrote, “Montrealers should be proud of Tomchei Temimim,” adding that December 12, the day of the building’s dedication, “should be a Yom Tov (holiday) in the city.”[[117: Zaklikowski, The People’s Rabbi.]] The students, ranging from their late teens to early twenties, were alone in Montreal without parents or relatives, the fate of their families in Europe uncertain. Yosef Rodal, the oldest of the students, reminisced to his son Shmuel, “The Rebbe was like a father to us. We students had lost our whole families. We didn’t have anybody, no cousins, nothing.” Shmuel’s mother told him, “The Rebbe would send Rabbi Shmuel Levitin to give chizuk, encouragement, to the students and see how they were.”[[118: Interview with Shmuel Rodal, JEM Oral History Project.]] In 1942, Rodal was the first of the Shanghai students to get married.[[119: Rodal was born in 1918 and was twenty-eight at the time that he married. He had been a senior student in the yeshivah in Otwock. His father passed away before the war. One brother survived, and his mother and remaining nine siblings lost their lives in the Holocaust.]] As a refugee, he had few resources for a wedding. “The Rebbe knew my mother was a Canadian girl and that they were used to getting diamond rings,” says his son Shmuel. “So, the Rebbe gave my father money to buy a diamond ring so that my mother would be happy.” Yitzchak Hendel asked the Rebbe if he should pursue a match that had been recommended to him. The Rebbe replied, “The suggestion requires review,”[[120: Letter to Rabbi Hendel dated 13 Tishrei, 5704 (February 12, 1943), Hendel family archive.]] telling Hendel to wait a bit. He turned to Rabbi Shmuel Levitin to inquire about the family and the young lady. After receiving a positive report, he told Hendel to look into it. Upon their engagement, the bride traveled to New York to meet with the Rebbe personally and receive his blessings. The Rebbe sent a delegation of Rabbis from New York to the wedding. As they grew older, most of the group stayed in Montreal; a few moved to New York. They each married and put down roots. Rabbi Hendel would become a prominent member of the city’s rabbinical court. Leibel Kramer would direct the yeshivah. Others became teachers and community leaders. The Rebbe was also gravely concerned about the fate of his two daughters and their husbands stranded in Europe.[[121: For a detailed account of the effort to save the Rebbe’s family, see Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, chap. 64.]] They were included in the visas granted to the Rebbe and the Chabad hierarchy; regulations dictated that those visas had to be issued directly to them by a US consul in Europe. His younger daughter, Sheina, and her husband Menachem Horenstein had relocated from France to Poland to care for his elderly parents. As Polish citizens, the Horensteins were not permitted to enter Latvia, so they were unable to join the Rebbe in Riga. Their file bounced between consulates in Europe as bureaucratic obstacles kept blocking their way. Aside from the issue of the visas, the Horensteins could not secure exit permits from Poland. Eventually, they lost touch with the Rebbe, and for many years their fate remained unknown. After the war, a survivor of the Treblinka death camp confirmed that Mendel Horenstein, his mother, his wife Sheina, and their adopted son[[122: The couple adopted their nephew, Yaakov Yosef Lis. See the teshurah (wedding memento) of Eliyahu and Chaya Mushka Shivacha, chap. 7.]] were killed in the fall of 1942.[[123: After the war, the Ramash conducted an inquiry into the fate of Mendel and Sheina Horenstein. In August 1949 he received confirmation of the date of their passing from Mordechai Unrad, who had been in the same barracks as Mendel in Treblinka. He wrote that Sheina was killed on the second day of Rosh HaShanah 1942 and her husband Mendel was killed seven weeks later, on 25 Cheshvan. Due to the fear over the grief the news would cause the Rebbe, who was in ill health, the Ramash withheld this information. Only two years later, in 1951, did the seventh Rebbe reveal the dates of their passing. Annually he recited Kaddish on the second day of Rosh HaShanah in memory of his sister-in-law, Sheina. For copies of the correspondence, see “Amazing Discovery: The Rebbe’s Attempts to Find Out About Rebbetzin Sheina,” available at: https://collive.com/amazing-discovery-the-rebbes-attempts-to-find-out-about-rebbetzin-sheina/.]] The Ramash and Chaya Mushka were in Paris when the war broke out, it seems that initially, when the war broke out, the Ramash hesitated to leave Europe.[[124: Undated letter from Feigin to Jacobson. It seems that it was written in February or March 1940 while the Rebbe was en route to the United States. Feigin writes that the Ramash is “strong in his own opinions” and that if he comes to the US, “much good could come from this.” He requests that Jacobson write to him to encourage his relocation. Kfar Chabad magazine, issue no. 671.]] That changed when the Germans invaded France. The Ramash and Chaya Mushka fled south to Vichy, France, after the Nazis occupied Paris. First they tried to secure visas from the US Consulate in Nice, but officials there were openly antagonistic to Jews. Ultimately, they succeeded at the consulate in Marseille. The couple’s plan was to head overland to neutral Spain and Portugal and from there to the United States. Acquiring the transit visas was problematic, but at the last minute, they received permission. On June 12, 1941, they boarded a ship in Lisbon and made the Atlantic crossing, arriving in the US eleven days later.[[125: Shmuel Menachem Mendel Butman, The Rebbe in Paris (Chazak Publishing, 2024), section 2.]] The night before the Schneersons disembarked, Yitzchok Groner and his father Mordechai were waiting for yechidut, a private meeting with the Rebbe.[[126: Farbrengen of Rabbi Yitzchok Groner at Oholei Torah, Sydney, Australia, tapes of Rabbi Groner.]] Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson burst out of the Rebbe’s study and turned to them with excitement. “Reb Mordechai,” he said, “the Rebbe said the whole yeshivah should go welcome his son-in-law! He is a gaon[[127: “Gaon” is an honorific title reserved for great Torah scholars. The Rebbe referred to the Ramash the same way in his personal diary. In private notations to himself in sections of the diary from 1946 and 1948 that have been published, every time he mentions the Ramash, he uses title “HaRav HaGaon – The Rabbi and Great Scholar” before his name. See Rabbi Shalom Dovber Levine, Treasures of the Chabad Library (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2009).]] (Torah prodigy) who knows all of Talmud Bavli and Yerushalmi, with the commentaries of Tosfot, Rashi, and Ran, and all the printed chasidic thought.” The welcome the next day for the Ramash and Chaya Mushka at the port was more subdued than the one the Rebbe had received a year earlier. A small crowd of Chasidim and some forty yeshivah students waited on the dock. Yitzchok Groner recalls, “Down came a youngish man with a black beard, a white creased hat, and a short brown-grey suit.” The couple was welcomed by the elder Chasidim. “Then he walked over to the forty students, greeting each one personally and asking their name.” Groner recalls being touched by both the Ramash’s personal warmth and his sense of humility. The Ramash’s arrival meant the start a new stage of the Rebbe’s work in the US. The Rebbe set up three new organizations that would become the institutional pillars of Chabad: Merkos L’Inyonei Chinuch (Central Organization for Jewish Education), which developed educational programs and eventually operated the global Chabad network; Kehot Publication Society, which evolved into one of the largest Jewish publishers; and Machne Israel, the social services branch of Chabad to bolster religious life. It also created a program to reach out to Jewish farmers, “whose distance from Jewish centers is likely to make them removed also from Jewish life.”[[128: Memo about the Machne Israel program, visit to Jewish farmers, Mindel Archives.]] The chairman of these three entities would be the newly arrived Ramash.[[129: By 1944, the annual budget of Merkos L’Inyonei Chinuch had reached $39,991 (more than $700,000 today). Financial statement, Merkos L’Inyonei Chinuch, June 1943–44, Mindel Archives.]] As the war progressed, engulfing the world and threatening the Jews of Europe, the Rebbe looked to Jewish tradition for inspiration to cope with the crisis. Judaism teaches that during difficult times, the Jewish nation must look inward for spiritual renewal, seek G-d’s help from above, and reorient their lives toward sanctity. The Rebbe believed a proper response would not only be temporal, but spiritual, based on millennia of Jewish teachings. Historically, the prophets called on the Jews to repent when they were faced with threats of annihilation, such as the prophet Yoel, who called for the Jews to “return to the Lord your G-d.”[[130: Yoel 2:13.]] We find the notion of a spiritual response throughout Jewish history. Faced with annihilation in ancient Persia, Mordechai gathered the Jewish children to study Torah so as to invoke divine mercy.[[131: Midrash Esther Rabbah, cited in “Who Should Teach the Children?” available at: chabad.org/1130179/.]] As the Talmud states, “If a person sees that suffering has befallen him, he should examine his deeds.”[[132: Berakhot 5a.]] Maimonides enshrines this ideal in the Mishneh Torah, his code of Jewish law, writing, “It is a divine command to cry out [to G-d] and sound trumpets when tragedies occur to the Jewish people.”[[133: In the Temple in Jerusalem, trumpets – and according to some, a shofar – were sounded. See Maimonides, Hilkhot Taanit (Laws of Fasting) 1:1. Four of the five chapters of Hilkhot Taanit outline the spiritual response that Jewish tradition dictates in times of crisis.]] The Rebbe’s worldview, rooted in the teachings of Kabbalah and Chasidism, taught that the physical world is a façade for the spiritual universe, which is the true reality. As the chasidic dictum states, “Just as the soul fills the body, so too G-d fills the world.” The Rebbe believed that self-reflection, repentance, and spiritual transformation would invoke a divine blessing on the Jews and all of mankind during this unprecedented worldwide conflict. He turned to the public with a call: “L’alter leteshuvah, l’alter legeulah – Immediate repentance will prompt redemption.” He emphasized the need to take spiritual stock and look inward, as that repentance would be a catalyst for salvation, blessing, and ultimately the redemption though the Messiah. He issued public statements urging all Jews to reaffirm their commitment to observance. To amplify this message, the Rebbe began publishing a magazine, HaKriah VeHaKedushah, starting in late 1940.[[134: The monthly magazine was published from October 1940 to September 1945.]] It was published monthly until the war’s end.[[135: Publication stopped the month that the war ended. One could argue that the object of the magazine was to provide a spiritual response to the war, and now that issue was moot.]] The primary language of the magazine was Yiddish, though starting in April 1941, a small English section was added. Its central message was that Jews should rededicate themselves to observance, as the prophets of earlier eras had demanded, with the hope that this would cause G-d to send deliverance.[[136: In 1967, on the eve of the Six-Day War, the seventh Rebbe inaugurated a tefillin campaign as a spiritual response to the threats to Israel’s survival.]] The Rebbe wanted American Jews to empathize and identify with their brethren in Europe, even on a personal level. Rabbi Leibel Groner recalls his teacher, Rabbi Zalman Gurary, coming into his classroom and telling the teenage students that “the Rebbe wanted us to experience in a small way the suffering of the Jews in Europe.” Gurary asked each of the students to undertake something that would remind them of the pain of the European Jews. Some of the children decided to cease attending movies. Groner resolved not to eat chocolate. Gurary made a list of the students’ decisions and reported them to the Rebbe.[[137: Author’s interview with Rabbi Groner. This practice of not eating chocolate during the war years became so ingrained that he did not indulge in chocolate throughout the rest of his life.]] When he landed on American soil, the Rebbe said the most important issue was saving European Jews. But he discovered that numerous barriers stood in the path of rescue. US government policy was actively blocking immigration, and leaders of the American Jewish establishment were hesitant to publicly pressure the Roosevelt administration to issue more visas. While the miraculous salvation of the Rebbe had been successful, it did not translate into political influence in Washington for Chabad.[[138: The one-time success of saving the Rebbe did not translate into long-term political access. The key government figure who advocated behind the scenes of the US government intervention to the save the Rebbe was White House official Benjamin Cohen. There is no record of meetings between Cohen and Chabad leaders once the Rebbe arrived in the US. According to Rabbi Dovid Edelman of Springfield, Justice Brandeis enlisted Cohen, whom he knew well, after the Rabinowitz brothers asked for his help to save the Rebbe. Though Cohen was not religious, he cared about the Jewish people, at times working quietly to advance Jewish interests. In 1938, Cohen met with British officials in London about the plight of Jewish refugees and afterward with Ben-Gurion in Paris. In 1948, when US officials were debating whether to recognize the State of Israel, Cohen worked behind the scenes to prod the White House to support the new state. Still, he believed that the United States should focus on winning the war, and he did not make special efforts to rescue European Jews. In a postwar interview, he stated, “To imagine Roosevelt could come up with a magic wand to solve the Jewish problem might be expecting too much. When you are in a dirty war some will suffer more than others.” William Lasser, Benjamin V. Cohen: Architect of the New Deal (The Century Foundation, 2002), chap. 11, 14–15.]] The Rebbe’s circle of Chasidim was quite small and comprised almost entirely of first-generation immigrants without political connections or financial resources.[[139: Many see Chabad today as a global Jewish powerhouse and have difficulty understanding the small scope and limited resources of Chabad in the early 1940s. The Rebbe’s yeshivas in Poland had been devastated, from 1,500 students before the war to fewer than fifty who found refuge first in Lithuania and later in Shanghai. The majority of his students and Chasidim in Poland were suffering under Nazi tyranny, and ultimately, many would be victims of the Holocaust. The largest concentration of Chasidim remained in Soviet Russia, unable to practice their religion freely. In the United States, the actual number of Chasidim probably did not exceed one hundred families. In the war years, the Rebbe had just four small college-level yeshivas with a few hundred students between the United States, Eretz Yisrael, Canada, and Shanghai. Unlike his father the Rashab, who had a network of affluent supporters in czarist Russia, the Rebbe did not have many supporters in the US. With limited financial resources, a paucity of political connections, government policy blocking immigration, and opposition by the American Jewish establishment, the Rebbe’s ability to orchestrate rescue was severely restricted.]] As Rabbi Herschel Feigelstock[[140: Rabbi Feigelstock (1922–2020) came from a non-chasidic religious family in Vienna; he met the Rebbe when he was there for medical treatment in 1933. The Feigelstock family fled Austria with the onset of the war, and Herschel and his brother made their way to England. Arrested as a foreign national, he was interned in Canada, and upon his release he joined the yeshivah. He later became the principal of the Chabad yeshivah in Montreal. See interview with Rabbi Herschel Feigelstock, JEM Oral History Project; Menachem Posner, “Rabbi Herschel Feigelstock, 98, Devoted Montreal Educator For 75 Years,” available at: chabad.org/4953637.]] says, “There were barely ten real Chasidim” who were fully dedicated to the Rebbe. Additionally, the Rebbe suffered from a chronic disease that became more acute with time. His speech was impaired, making it difficult to understand him, and he was constrained to a wheelchair. His efforts were severely limited by a lack of major donors, placing the Rebbe under constant financial strain. Most American Jews with means were not Orthodox or sympathetic to the causes the Rebbe championed. Few understood the real risks of life and death that the Jews were facing in Europe. The Rebbe had struggled to secure the funds needed to facilitate the escape of just a small number of yeshivah students from Lithuania via Russia. Major Jewish groups would not support the rescue effort. He appealed to Jews across the country, borrowing funds when he fell short. All these factors dramatically inhibited the Rebbe’s ability to organize the rescue of his own Chasidim and others. Major Jewish groups like the American Jewish Committee, the Anti-Defamation League, and the American Jewish Congress controlled Jews’ access to Washington. These organizations were dominated by Jews, many from Germany, who had immigrated to the US in the mid and late nineteenth century. By the 1940s they had attained financial success and assimilated to a large degree. Despite their success, they were apprehensive about being fully accepted in US society, fearing the anti-Semitism that had driven them and their ancestors to American shores. Professor Jonathan Sarna describes the Jews of the time as “an anxious subculture.”[[141: Professor Jonathan Sarna, American Judaism (Yale University, 2004), chap. 5.]] They would not tolerate Orthodox Jews taking a leadership role, concerned that they might be just a bit “too Jewish,” tarnishing the image of good citizens who looked like all other Americans. Their religious garb might provoke anti-Semitism, and they might be too parochial with their demands. The number of Orthodox Jews was small and most were European immigrants whose first language was Yiddish. They had no real political power or connections to American political leaders.[[142: In 1938, Rabbi Meir Bar Ilan, leader of Mizrachi, the religious Zionists, visited the US and opened a Mizrachi Washington office. This raised the ire of Rabbi Stephen Wise, who orchestrated a condemnation by the Emergency Committee for Zionist Affairs and forced its closure. Medoff, Jewish Americans and Political Participation, chap. 4. Today, the three major Orthodox groups, Agudath Israel, the Orthodox Union, and Chabad, all have a presence in Washington. Agudah and the OU are active on the political front, advocating for important issues. Chabad retains its policy of nonpartisanship and focuses on educational programs.]] Their financial resources were meager, and to a large degree, the Orthodox were excluded from the broader Jewish communal power structure. It would take decades before they developed the self-confidence and organizational influence to strike out on their own and assert their views. The preeminent Jewish leader of the time was Reform Rabbi Stephen S. Wise.[[143: Stephen Wise (1874–1949) was born in Hungary to an Orthodox family. He immigrated to the US as a child and became a Reform rabbi. A close confidant of FDR, he was the most influential figure in US Jewry in the 1930s and 1940s. The Rebbe had met Wise during his 1929 visit, when Wise visited him on Simchat Torah. The Rebbe refers to him in his correspondence during the 1929–30 US visit a number of times. There are no historical records indicating that Wise assisted with saving the Rebbe from the Nazis, nor any indication that he helped the Rebbe with his efforts to save European Jewry. It seems his door was closed to the Rebbe and to other Orthodox leaders, which forced the Rebbe to find other avenues such as the Quakers to gain access to decision makers in Washington.]] He stood at the helm of a conglomerate of key Jewish groups, including the American Jewish Congress, the American Zionist Organization, the Jewish Institute of Religion rabbinical school, and a prominent congregation in New York. It was unprecedented for one person to so dominate Jewish life in the US. As America entered the war in December of 1941, the prevailing attitude was that the plight of Jews would be resolved once overall victory had been achieved. Leaders like Wise feared making the war a Jewish issue, apprehensive that it would create a wave of anti-Semitism. He was a loyal apologist for President Roosevelt, and was wary of confronting the president, or the “chief,” as he called him. As historian Rafael Medoff says, “Roosevelt glad-handed Wise.” Wise did lobby quietly to help the Jews, but he was unwilling to confront the leaders in Washington or muster American Jewry to protest US inaction to help European Jews. It was Peter Bergson,[[144: Peter Bergson (1915–2001) was originally known by the name Hillel Kook. A nephew of Chief Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak Kook, Bergson was a Zionist activist who came to the US in 1940 to organize American Jews to defend Palestine. As the fate of European Jewry became known, he organized protests and stood up to the complacency of liberal Jewish leaders such as Weiss. See Stephanie Flanders, “Peter Bergson, Who Helped European Jews, Dies at 86,” available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2001/08/20/us/peter-bergson-who-helped-european-jews-dies-at-86.html.]] an immigrant from Palestine, who galvanized grassroots support in the Jewish community for European Jewry. He placed large ads in the major papers and staged productions lamenting their fate. He also orchestrated the Rabbis’ March on Washington in 1943. Wise opposed him, appalled by what he called his “theatrics.” He did everything he could to ostracize Bergson, refusing to allow major Jewish groups to cooperate with him and blocking his political access to Washington. Weiss told Bergson, “You are endangering American Jewry.”[[145: Medoff, Jewish Americans and Political Participation, 187.]] Forced to bypass the Jewish liberal leaders, the Rebbe turned to the Quaker-led American Friends Service Committee,[[146: The American Friends Service Committee based in Philadelphia was a pacifist group founded by the Quaker community. While it is unclear how the connection to them was established, it may have been arranged by Rabbi Ephraim Yolles, a prominent Philadelphia rabbi who was close to the Rebbe, or by the Kramer brothers, Chaim Zalman and Avraham Dov.]] which arranged an appointment with First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt.[[147: Clarence E. Pickett, head of the AFSC, appealed directly to Mrs. Roosevelt after meeting with “three distinguished Orthodox rabbis of the bearded sort” (apparently referring to the Rashag, Yolles, and another rabbi) on March 4, 1941. Letter from Pickett to Roosevelt dated March 5, 1941.]] In March of 1941, the Rashag led a delegation of Chabad leaders who met her in the White House. They implored Mrs. Roosevelt to intervene with the Russian government to permit the emigration of the Bobover Rebbe, Rabbi Benzion Halberstam, as well as prominent Chabad Chasidim[[148: Memorandum #2 for the First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, March 18, 1941. The document details the request to facilitate the immigration of Chasidim under threat in Soviet-controlled areas, including Latvia and Lithuania. One of those Chasidim, Sholom Levitan, forged many documents for the yeshivah students who escaped via Japan, and he was being held in a Soviet jail in Vilnius. He was later killed by the Nazis.]] who were Polish refugees in Russia and Soviet-controlled Latvia and Lithuania. But her attempt to seek the assistance of US and Russian officials was unsuccessful. The Bobover Rebbe fled to Russian-controlled Lvov; the Germans invaded in July 1941, and the Rebbe was beaten to death by German soldiers. The Chasidim in Riga were killed after the German invasion of Latvia. Assistant Secretary of State Breckinridge Long, who oversaw US immigration policy, did his utmost to block Jewish immigration. Each country was allotted a quota for immigration, and Long ensured that those quotas were not filled. Medoff says, “Two hundred thousand more Jews could have entered under the existing law than actually did.”[[149: Medoff, Jewish Americans and Political Participation, chap. 8.]] US officials refused the pleas of Jewish leaders to divert warplanes by just a few miles to bomb Auschwitz.[[150: “The United States and the Holocaust: Why Auschwitz Was Not Bombed,” available at: https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/the-united-states-and-the-holocaust-why-auschwitz-was-not-bombed.]] Between the hostility of Long, the apathy of Roosevelt, the silence of the media, and the unwillingness of Jewish leaders to challenge the administration, there was little hope for the Jews being systematically exterminated in Europe. This caused the Rebbe much despair. In March 1943, he wrote a long, anguished letter[[151: In response to Klatzkin’s call for public demonstrations, the Rebbe writes, “I don’t know from demonstrations, and for whom and why,” reflecting his view that quiet diplomacy was usually the most effective means of advancing an agenda with government authorities. He lamented the silence and apathy of the media, government, and others. The Rebbe reflects on the Jewish leadership that has lost its way, calling them “false prophets.” He also mentions the fate of “children of Tehran” and the group of religious children that the Jewish Agency forced into secular schools in Palestine. Klazkin had influence in Zionist circles; perhaps the Rebbe hoped he would speak up on the issue.]] to Dr. Jacob Klatzkin,[[152: Dr. Jacob Klatzkin (1882–1948) came from a rabbinic family. In his youth, he attended yeshivah; later he became a university-educated Jewish scholar, writing extensively on Spinoza. He was a Zionist activist but rejected the concept that the Jewish people were chosen for a special mission. Despite clear theological differences, the Rebbe wrote respectfully of him, referring to him as “a serious person…who has not been infected [with the idea] that in America all is permitted…. [He] searches for truth.” Igrot Kodesh, vol. 7, letter dated 24 Adar Bet, 5703 (March 31, 1943).]] a noted Jewish philosopher and activist. Klatzkin had corresponded with the Rebbe, suggesting the time had come for “Jews to march with Torah scrolls adorned with a tallis to speak out about the murder of thousands of Jews.”[[153: The Rebbe quotes from Klatzkin’s original letter in his response.]] He hoped this dramatic action would wake up the public. There had been some protests in New York, but none had taken on the religious nature Klatzkin was suggesting. The Rebbe responded that tragically, no one was interested in the plight of European Jews. The media “are sitting behind a shade,” ignoring the suffering. Newspapers like The New York Times relegated their sparse reports of Nazi atrocities to the back pages.[[154: Ashley Rindsberg, The Gray Lady Winked: How The New York Times’s Misreporting, Distortions and Fabrications Radically Alter History (Midnight Oil Publishers, 2021).]] Political leaders, the Rebbe lamented, were unwilling to act. “Their ears are closed to hearing our cries, and their eyes are shut to our rivers of tears.” The Rebbe argued that throughout Jewish history, the “kindness of the nations of the world had protected the Jewish people.” But even countries who had acted benevolently to the Jews in the past were oblivious to the present misery. “Now their ears are shut and their eyes are closed to the spilling of Jewish blood.” The Rebbe noted that legions of diplomats were telling Jewish leaders, “‘Once the war is over, we will see what we can do.” He added pointedly, “There are organizations who defend the abuser of animals, but none defending the Jewish people.” The Rebbe felt that the Jewish community was sleeping, its leaders failing. Those with access to levers of power in Washington were unwilling to speak up. Instead of saving European Jews or bolstering Jewish education, they were engaged in interfaith activities. “The priests invite the rabbi to conduct a Passover Seder in their place of worship and in return the rabbi invites the priests to hear the shofar blowing and Kol Nidrei in the synagogue.” With all the doors closed, the Rebbe told Klatzkin that the time had come for “Jews to turn to G-d with prayer and supplications…. We must call every Jew, irrespective of party or perspective, to fasting and prayer.” The Rebbe noted to Klatzkin that members of other religions in the US were responding to the war in a spiritual manner as well. “We are living in a time when believers of faith, men, women, and children, gather at their houses of worship and turn to G-d with prayer to remove the darkness from the world.” Other faith leaders had put out a call for “a day of prayer for victory.” The time had come for Jews to do the same, he said, and “gather in synagogues and study halls to pray to our Father in heaven.” The Rebbe quoted the High Holidays prayer, “The decree can be reversed with repentance,” saying that prayer and repentance would prompt the fulfillment of G-d’s promise to send the Messiah, a redeemer who would transform the world into a place of sanctity and peace. Seven months after writing Klatzkin, the Rebbe supported the Rabbis’ March on Washington, the only Jewish demonstration held at the Capitol during the war years. It was orchestrated by Peter Bergson in conjunction with Vaad Hatzalah and Agudas Harabonim three days before Yom Kippur in 1943. More than four hundred rabbis, all Orthodox, many bearded and wearing the traditional rabbinical garb, gathered at the Capitol and marched to the White House. The Rebbe, unable to travel,[[155: The Rebbe was not well and was relegated to a wheelchair.]] personally selected[[156: The Rebbe was provided with a list of potential delegates for the march and selected the four he wished to attend. The full list of suggested participants is available in the Mindel Archives. See also Partial List of Rabbis in Pilgrimage to Washington, Jabotinsky Archives, Tel Aviv; this list includes the names Gurary, Levitin, Mindel, and Quint.]] a delegation of four distinguished Chasidim to represent him. They included two of his secretaries, Dr. Nissan Mindel and Rabbi Eliyahu Quint; his close confidant and rosh yeshivah of the yeshivah in Brooklyn, Rabbi Zalman Gurary; and Rabbi Binyamin Levitin,[[157: Levitin accompanied the Rebbe on the voyage from Europe. He was a personal assistant to the Rebbe from 1940 to 1946.]] his personal assistant and son of Chabad elder Rabbi Shmuel Levitin.[[158: Dr. Nissan Mindel retained notes with impressions of the day; see the Mindel Archives. See also “When 500 Rabbis Marched in Washington, DC,” video available at: https://collive.com/when-500-rabbis-marched-in-washington-dc/.]] The demonstration was a dramatic move. There had been rallies for European Jews held in New York and other cities, but never had Jewish leaders marched on the White House. At the time, the Orthodox community had no organized arm for political activism or a presence in the nation’s capital. Most of the rabbis who took part in the march were Yiddish-speaking European immigrants who had lived in countries where protest would bring swift government retribution. Washington was the exclusive domain of the liberal-dominated Jewish establishment, whose leaders were opposed to the march. Samuel Roseman, a senior White House advisor and important leader of the American Jewish Committee, advised the president not to meet with the rabbis, claiming that they were “not representative of the most thoughtful elements of Jewry.” Roseman also told the president that he had tried “to keep the horde from storming Washington.” Reform Rabbi Stephen S. Wise publicly derided the march as an “Orthodox rabbinical parade” and a “painful and even lamentable exhibition.” Ridiculing the organizers as “stuntists,” he accused them of offending “the dignity of [the Jewish] people.”[[159: Medoff, Jewish Americans and Political Participation, chap. 5.]] It was these types of leaders the Rebbe had chastised since his arrival in the US for their unwillingness to stand up for Jewish values, calling their behavior a “lack of Jewish pride and courage.”[[160: Sefer HaSichos, 5702 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society), chap. 12.]] Seven months earlier, in his letter to Klatzkin, the Rebbe had questioned the value of demonstrations – “For whom, and for what purpose?” – expressing skepticism about their effectiveness. Chasidic historian Eliezer Zaklikowski explains that despite his general wariness of demonstrations, the Rebbe supported this march because he felt that “it was a positive, constructive event with clear-cut goals and a strong expression of Jewish pride.” The Rebbe also respected Rabbi Eliezer Silver, one of the prominent rabbis who led the march. “He was a fearless Jewish leader. And the rabbis were attempting to influence US policy at the highest level. They planned to see the president with a list of requests.” Dr. Mindel retained a firsthand account of the march in his personal archive. “They marched from Union Station to the Capitol, where they were met by Vice President Henry Wallace and members of Congress.” Rabbi Silver read the petition, bursting out in tears in the middle. “Millions have already died, sentenced to fire and the sword,” he cried. “How can we pray on the holy day of Yom Kippur knowing we have not fulfilled our responsibility? So we came brokenhearted on the eve of the holiest day, Yom Kippur, to ask President Roosevelt to form a special agency to rescue the remainder of the Jewish nation in Europe.”[[161: “Historic Treasures by Rabbi Sholom Ber Schapiro,” video available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q28r77rwxq8.]] Time magazine reported that Wallace was uncomfortable[[162: In February 1943, Wallace met with prominent Zionist leader Rabbi Meir Berlin and refused to acknowledge that European Jews were threatened with extinction; he also failed to recognize Zionism. See Medoff, Jewish Americans and Political Participation, 162.]] at the meeting and made no mention of rescuing any Jews.[[163: Time, October 18, 1943.]] From the Capitol, wrote Mindel, “they walked to the Lincoln Memorial, where they prayed for the welfare of the president.” From there, the rabbis walked to the White House. Mindel records their surprise and subsequent disillusionment when they were refused a meeting with the president. “When the rabbis reached the gates of the White House, they were stunned to be told that the president was unavailable to meet with the delegates. What the rabbis did not know was that FDR’s top Jewish advisors, Wise and Roseman, told him to avoid the rabbis. FDR left the White House by a back exit. The rabbis were very disappointed.” With bitterness, Mindel concludes, “It was a tragic day.” There was a silver lining. The president’s refusal to meet with the rabbis created a media storm, and the attention helped raise public consciousness about the plight of European Jews. In the wake of the march, Congress held hearings calling for a US government initiative to save European Jews.[[164: Jewish leaders attempted to deter this effort. New York Jewish Congressman Sol Bloom (who helped save the Rebbe) tried to block the hearings. Wise testified in favor of the War Refugee Board, adding conditions for immigration to Palestine that he knew would torpedo the plan. Privately, he told associates that he was against it and fumed that Bergson had been able to orchestrate these hearings. See Medoff, Jewish Americans and Political Participation, chap. 5.]] That prompted Roosevelt to finally act. Three months after the march, in January 1944, the president signed an order creating the War Refugee Board.[[165: At the time of the Rabbis’ March, there was a growing awareness in the US of the plight of European Jews. The march and the increasing publicity about the fate of the Jews helped Bergson lobby Congress to call for official US government intervention. This prompted a series of public hearings about creating the War Refugee Board. Secretary of State Breckinridge Long opposed the board. Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau ultimately convinced the president to authorize it.]] It saved many Jews, particularly those in Hungary. But it was too late for the more than five million Jews who had already been killed. The Rebbe continued to work to find a way for Jews in general and his Chasidim in particular to reach places of refuge, be it the United States or other countries.[[166: The Vaad Hatzalah was also involved in rescue efforts. Until this point, its focus had primarily been supporting yeshivah students in war-torn Europe and Japan. Following the march, the focus shifted to efforts to save Jews in Europe.]] A few Chasidim found an avenue to the US, but the majority remained stranded in Latvia, Poland, and Lithuania, including the Rebbe’s secretary Rabbi Yechezkel Feigin and Rabbi Mordechai Dubin. In June of 1940, the Russians invaded Latvia, creating additional barriers to escape. The Rebbe worked on every front to obtain visas and to assist those still in Europe. Packages and funds were smuggled from nearby neutral countries to help those who were trapped to survive. The Rebbe seized every opportunity to help refugees. In 1940, when he learned that the Dominican Republic had become one of the few countries to open its doors to European Jews, he reached out to help.[[167: Rabbi Lipa Steimetz had been living in Paris adjacent to the Ramash, who advised Steimetz to seek refuge in the Dominican Republic in 1939. A prominent scholar and mohel, he built up Jewish life on the island, reaching out to the Rebbe in 1940. The Rebbe responded with a series of ten questions about the state of Jewish affairs on the island and pledged his assistance; he remained in contact with the community.]] When a group of Jewish youth and teens from Germany were interned[[168: The Kindertransport brought children from Nazi-controlled Europe to Britian; some of the children were later transferred to Canada. See “Kindertransport, 1938–40,” available at: https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/kindertransport-1938-40.]] in camps in Canada in 1941, the Rebbe urged the newly arrived students in Montreal to make efforts to free them.[[169: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 6, letter to Rabbi Shumel Levitin dated 26 Cheshvan, 5702 (November 16, 1941).]] In 1944, when close to one thousand Jewish refugees arrived in a camp in Oswego in upstate New York, the Rebbe sprang into action.[[170: One thousand Jewish refugees, many of them concentration camp survivors, were admitted to the US and placed in the camp in Oswego. The refugees arrived on August 5, 1944, and eleven days later, on August 16, the Rebbe’s delegation visited the camp to meet with them. The camp was established by the War Relocation Authority, which had operated camps for Japanese refugees during the war; this was the only camp for Europeans. The refugees were not given US immigration status. When the camp was closed in 1946, some refugees remained in the US, some reunited with their families in Europe, and some immigrated to Israel. See Token Shipment: The Story of America’s War Refugee Shelter, United States Department of Interior, kovetz Lubavitch 4, cited in Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit, 385. See also “The Secret History of America’s Only WWII Refugee Camp,” available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/11/nyregion/oswego-jewish-refugees-world-war-two.html.]] Ten days after the refugees arrived, the Rebbe sent a prestigious delegation, including Rabbis Hodakov and Kazarnovsky and Dr. Mindel, to meet them and evaluate their situation. In the coming months, Chabad provided their religious needs, as well as offering educational programs and general assistance. When they were released in 1945, a group of the children enrolled in the Chabad yeshivah in Brooklyn. When the Rebbe discovered that several German Jews, including the son of the Kapischnitzer Rebbe, were being held in a refugee camp in Australia, he urged his Chasid there, Moshe Zalman Feiglin, to intervene and assist him.[[171: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter dated 15 Kislev, 5701 ( January 14, 1941). In 1940, the British shipped a large group of Jewish German refugees to Australia, where they were interned. See “Refugee Internment,” available at: https://ergo.slv.vic.gov.au/explore-history/australia-wwii/home-wii/refugee-internment.]] During the war years, the Rebbe focused on what he called his “second mission in America,” transforming US Jewry. His goal, the reorientation of Jewish life toward tradition, was ambitious and unprecedented. As the seventh Rebbe pointed out some years later, “Despite his persistent medical condition, he widened his efforts to help others.”[[172: The seventh Rebbe took the lead in assisting the Rebbe during his many medical treatments in Europe. In the same talk, he states that a certain medical consultation took place “eighteen years before his passing.” It seems he is referring to the period that the Rebbe was receiving medical care in Berlin. Transcript, farbrengen, 13 Tishrei, 5738.]] At the time, Jewish education rooted in classic Torah values was limited to a small group of yeshivas centered primarily in New York. The Rebbe believed that developing a national network of Jewish schools with a curriculum of both Jewish and secular subjects[[173: In Riga, despite reservations, the Rebbe supported the local Orthodox schools that integrated secular and religious subjects. He still greatly favored the classic cheder system of exclusive religious education, but in the US he chose a strategy of building schools that offered both religious and secular studies.]] was essential to nurturing Jews who would have a fidelity to tradition. Those schools would not only educate children but influence their families and communities. As he made his way across the Atlantic, the Rebbe had long discussions with Rabbi Chaim Hodakov, superintendent of the Jewish schools in Latvia,[[174: The Jewish school system was an official part of the educational programs in Latvia. Hodakov was a government employee and responsible for overseeing all Jewish schools in the country.]] to design a comprehensive plan to revamp Jewish education in the US.[[175: As retold by Rabbi Yehuda Krinsky. “I worked side by side with Rabbi Hodakov for many years,” Krinsky said. “Once he recalled to me about the time he was on the ship with the Rebbe.” Umaleh Haaretz Farbrengens (Brooklyn, NY: Office of the Kinus Hashluchim, 2022), 235.]] Hodakov’s extensive experience in Latvia[[176: Hodakov was supposed to come to the United States for a short while. “I had not taken vacation for three years, so I had accumulated vacation time,” he recalled. The Rebbe urged him to use that time now. He did, leaving behind his wedding gifts and other possessions. The trip “turned out to be my salvation.” Shortly after his arrival in the US, Latvia was invaded by Russia and then Germany. See family Chanukah recording of Rabbi Hodakov.]] would help the Rebbe establish the first national Jewish educational network in the US and Canada, upgrade Hebrew schools, and create new dynamic youth programs. Until now, day schools and yeshivas had been local grassroots initiatives, mostly located in New York. Hebrew schools were run by local congregations with few standards of instruction. They needed a formal curriculum and trained teachers. The majority of Jewish children at the time received little to no Jewish education. In 1940, only eight thousand children attended Jewish day schools and yeshivas. There was a network of Talmud Torahs, Hebrew schools, and chadarim serving as supplemental educational programs for children who attended public school. These supplementary schools were populated by immigrant children. Many teachers were untrained Yiddish speakers who lacked teaching skills. They could quote the Talmud they had studied in Europe, but they had abandoned observance in the US. Instead of instilling a love for Jewish tradition, they did the opposite. “They were maskilim, secularists, who denied the basic principles of Jewish belief,” says Avraham Hecht. The Rebbe described these schools as treif, nonkosher.[[177: Sefer HaSichos, 5702, address to male and female teachers, Chicago.]] There were initiatives for educational reform, curriculum upgrades, teacher training, and educational resources. Most of these efforts were designed to modernize Jewish education, discarding traditional values and reorienting the programs toward Jewish culture, Zionism, and history. Instead of infusing children with a love of Torah, these so-called state-of-the-art schools attempted to create a new style of Jewish identity based on culture and Jewish nationalism.[[178: For a history of the initiatives to improve Hebrew schools in the non-Orthodox community, see Jonathan Krasner, The Benderly Boys and American Jewish Education (Brandeis University Press, 2011).]] In a talk to Jewish community leaders during his 1942 visit to Chicago, the Rebbe reasserted his belief that Jewish education was the key to the future.[[179: Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, 5702, chap. 13.]] “The entire religious state of the Jewish people depends on the nature of education and the guidance provided in the Talmud Torah and the yeshivah,” he said.It was vital that the educators and administrators themselves be examples of Jewish observance. “Matters of Torah and Jewish education must be entrusted to steadfast G-d-fearing people.” The Rebbe said that educators who are not role models “are leading children to an active rejection of their faith.” He told the Chicago rabbis to exert leadership in the sphere of education. “When it comes to checking the kosher status of what may be put into kosher saucepans, there are plenty of supervisors, but when it comes to checking what may be put into the heads of little Jewish children, there are no supervisors and no stamps of approval. You rabbis bear the full responsibility for the current state of education” – which, he said, was “deplorable.” Avraham Hecht says the European-born, Yiddish-speaking rabbis “were in a haze. They had no idea how to solve the problems in America.” Many of their own children did not remain observant, and they were daunted by the challenge of finding their way in a new world. “They didn’t know how to make a living, they didn’t speak English, they didn’t understand American Jewish life.”[[180: Hecht, My Spiritual Journey.]] The Rebbe attempted to prod the rabbis to adapt and take responsibility for the Jewish education in their communities. While the Rebbe challenged the rabbis to assert their leadership, at times using harsh, direct language, to the teachers his tone was filled with affection. In Chicago, he told Hebrew school teachers, “You need to constantly keep in mind what treasures have been entrusted to your hands. Material treasures, gold, gems, and jewelry, are all worthless next to the priceless G-d-given gifts that the parents of these children have entrusted to your hands.”[[181: Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, 5702, chap. 13.]] The Rebbe compared the role of a teacher to someone planting an orchard. “An orchardist works long and hard for many long years until he lives to see that his tender sampling has grown in a strong and healthy tree.” He explained that as teachers, they were working in G-d’s orchard and their responsibility was to instill proper values in their charges. “In return, the greatest moral and spiritual gratification will be yours when you see that our frail little plants have grown into big, sturdy, thickly branched trees that yield delicious fruit and beautify G-d’s own orchard.” By prodding Jewish community leaders and rabbis, the Rebbe attempted to reform existing afternoon Hebrew schools. He also launched a network of Hebrew schools in New York and other cities, developed the curriculum, and expanded the ranks of teachers. The Rebbe realized that many children would not attend yeshivah or Hebrew school, so he began an array of other programs. The largest was Released Time, a weekly after-school program, which was complemented by Mesibot Shabbat clubs and other youth programs. He published a monthly children’s magazine, Talks and Tales, and encouraged the creation of educational materials and curriculums. The Rebbe believed that every method should be used to teach the youth. As Gershon Kranzler wrote, “everything, textbooks, fiction, magazines, even comics, whatever the other world was using to lure the Jewish child away from Jewish heritage, had to be drawn into this service.” During the 1940s, more than two million items – a vast collection of books, magazines, and educational materials – were published.[[182: The Wonder Rabbi.]] To implement his ambitious agenda of boosting education, the Rebbe needed manpower: teachers and educators with leadership skills who could build institutions and rabbis who could inspire. They would need the courage to stand up for Jewish values in the face of the opposition they would encounter from the Jewish establishment. A tiny group of young Americans and a few Europeans took the lead. They were the students of the burgeoning Tomchei Temimim yeshivah in New York and the young women in the Chabad community. In total, they did not amount to a more than a few dozen, but they became the Rebbe’s vanguard. The immigrant yeshivah students from Poland spoke little English, had a European look, and were swimming against the cultural mainstream. The small group of Americans who had joined the yeshivah had been educated in an era in which Jews instructed their children not to flaunt their heritage. Altering the mindset of his students and Chasidim to be more strident with their Jewish identity was not easy. The Rebbe inspired the young chasidic men and women to dedicate themselves to the mission of Jewish education. In talks, letters, and teachings, the Rebbe time and again spoke of the importance and obligation of caring for one’s fellow Jews. He wrote to the yeshivah students that they must spread Jewish learning. “As you know, I require from the students of my yeshivas that they infuse the homes of Jews with the light of Torah.”[[183: Igrot Kodesh 8:221, letter to “my dear students” dated 12 Adar, 5704 (March 7, 1944). The Rebbe writes that those who want to be “mekusharim (bound to him as Chasidim) must make an effort to assist in one of the institutions I have established…to make their environment filled with the light of Torah and yiras Shamayim (G-d-fearing spirit).”]] To the students, the Rebbe was a powerful role model, having almost lost his life in Russia for sustaining a Jewish educational network under the Soviets. Avraham Hecht said, “We looked at the Rebbe like Daniel in the lions’ den.” They were awed by his determination and the way that nothing fazed him. “The Rebbe didn’t stop.” The Rebbe’s objective was to motivate the young rabbinical students to break out of their traditional role of pursuing personal academic excellence and instead become communal activists. To motivate his students, the Rebbe highlighted the mitzvah of ahavat Yisrael (loving one’s fellow Jew) as the paramount ideal. The Rebbe modeled this in the love he showed to others and the endearment he expressed to his students. Secondly, he empowered the students to be leaders, providing them with broad directives while giving them the space to operate in their own creative fashion, expecting them to think for themselves and apply their own ingenuity to the challenges facing each community. Thirdly, he told them to seek inspiration from the students of Tomchei Temimim in Russia, who were putting their lives on the line under great oppression to sustain Jewish life there. Finally, the Rebbe reminded them that their efforts could very well be the tipping point in Jewish transformation and be the catalyst for the ultimate redemption through the coming of the Messiah. In the early 1940s, traditional Judaism was still in fortress mode: preserve the core, guard the fort, and keep outside influences at bay. The Rebbe was taking a totally different strategy, going on the offensive with confidence. It would be an uphill battle to change attitudes amongst his own Chasidim and in the greater Orthodox community. The younger generation being nurtured in the Rebbe’s yeshivah in Brooklyn were being instilled with this idealism. However, there was an undertone of dissent amongst some of the elder Chasidim. They had grown up in Europe, where the lines between secular and religious were stronger. Some had family members who had abandoned observance, replacing it with devotion to socialism, Zionism, Communism, or other ideologies.[[184: Each of these ideologies had its own solution. Many Jews were drawn away from observance and stood at the leadership of these causes. See David Biale, et al., Hasidism: A New History (Princeton University Press, 2018).]] In the US, these Chasidim had children, family members, and friends who chose to assimilate. They had sacrificed everything to preserve their faith, and it rendered them defensive and somewhat insular. The Rebbe was now prodding them to look outward and engage Jews who were not observant. This was a fundamental change in mindset, and just as the Rebbe had to contend with the insecure in the broader Orthodox community, he had to overcome similar attitudes among his own Chasidim. The Rebbe acknowledged the difficulties with the Chabad community, sharing his feelings in a poignant letter in 1943.[[185: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 6, letter to Yosef Flier dated 24 Tevet, 5703 ( January 1, 1943).]] “My heart is greatly pained by anash who are not helping in my work – not in establishing Torah classes, the study of chasidic philosophy, the yeshivah, or the work of Merkos L’Inyonei Chinuch [organizing educational programming]. We were exiled from Lubavitch and afterward wandered from city to city and country to country.” He lamented leaving a rich spiritual culture in Europe. “Close to three years ago, l left a place full of life, filled with Torah, mitzvot, and a radiant chasidic life.” He contrasted that with the United States, where he said Jewish observance was superficial: “Everyone is focused on earning a livelihood.” For generations, Chasidim had dedicated themselves to Torah with self-sacrifice for Jewish principles. In the US, this was proving more challenging. “Whom do I have here, and what do I have here?” the Rebbe wrote. “I fell into this sea of ice, which lacks sanctity, pureness, and an open heart. There are those who are sincerely interested in my situation, but not fully willing to help me fulfill the mission that I have in this world.” He ended on a note of optimism. “Hopefully, soon my dear friends in anash will awaken to fulfill the responsibility they have, since G-d has brought them to this country.”[[186: The seventh Rebbe would also face internal resistance in the early years of his leadership. Some Chabad parents were not enthusiastic about his plan to send their children to communities across the globe. While the sixth Rebbe tasked students with specific missions, such as opening a school or becoming the rabbi of an existing synagogue, the seventh Rebbe broadened this by instructing the couples he began dispatching in the late 1950s to transform their new communities with whatever was needed. That could mean revitalizing existing institutions or building new ones from the ground up. He charged them with the responsibility for the welfare of every Jew. As Rabbi Hodakov famously told a young rabbi heading out to a new community, “If there are a hundred Jews there and you have reached ninety-nine, you have not completed your mission.” Both the sixth and seventh Rebbes created a new paradigm in Jewish leadership, sending young couples rooted in the teachings of Torah to be Jewish leaders. Permanent emissaries were always couples. The women, too, were entrusted with equal responsibility in these missions, propelling women to a larger Jewish leadership role that shattered historical stereotypes.]] It was the students in the yeshivah who would take the lead. One night, they were discussing how to implement the Rebbe’s vision. Avraham Hecht, just twenty years old and so bashful that he had not spoken at his own bar mitzvah, resolved to act. A week later he found himself standing at a podium in a large Brooklyn congregation, urging its members to enroll their children in a Jewish school.“The Torah teaches us that a parent must teach his child how to swim,” he said. “Learning Torah gives a child the ability to navigate his way in the world. It’s essential to sign up your child in a yeshivah.”[[187: Author’s interview with Avraham Hecht.]] Hecht was proud of his debut and begin going from shul to shul to spread the message. The Rebbe dispatched yeshivah students to cities in the northeast to enroll more children. In 1940, Meyer Greenberg, a twenty-year-old American who had studied in Otwock, walked into a Scranton, Pennsylvania, synagogue and announced: “If you have children whom you would like to send to yeshivah, we will take them, tuition free. Meet me tomorrow at the train station at noon.” One Hungarian immigrant, Tzipora Gross, was there with her two sons, ten-year-old Elye and nine-year-old Berel. They joined the yeshivah and celebrated their bar mitzvahs in Brooklyn.[[188: Author’s interview with Elye Gross’s son Noochie.]] The Rebbe began to send rabbis and yeshivah students to open schools in cities outside New York. Avraham Hecht recalls, “I wanted to remain in the yeshivah and study, but the Rebbe wanted to revolutionize Jewish education elsewhere.”[[189: There was a debate between the Rebbe and other prominent rabbinic scholars. The Rebbe’s priority was to abate assimilation in the US. Once his students had developed broad Jewish knowledge, he wanted them to take responsibility for the Jewish destiny. Other rabbinic scholars argued that the most important goal was to establish in the US great centers of learning; they felt it was important for students to remain in yeshivah for a longer period of time. This led to the development of kollels, centers of learning where married yeshivah students spent many years. This debate reflected historical differences reaching back centuries: On one side were the teachings of Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov, who stressed the spiritual potential of every Jew. On the other side was the belief of classic Lithuanian yeshivas that the pursuit of scholarship by an elite would ensure the Jewish future. Author’s interview with Hecht.]] They were going into unknown and uncharted territory – never before in US Jewish history had a rabbi dispatched a cadre of young rabbis and educators to communities to set up schools. They weren’t always welcome. Most Jewish parents were not interested in parochial schools. The trend was to assimilate into American culture, and the ticket to success was public school, which offered a path toward higher education and a successful career. Afternoon Hebrew schools were considered the optimal mode of Jewish education. There was little sympathy for full-time Jewish schools, which many believed would lead to greater insularity. The goal was to become mainstream Americans. Mottel Altein[[190: Yaakov Ort, “Rabbi Mordechai Altein, 100, a Leading Chabad Rabbi in North America,” available at chabad.org/4567611.]] was single and just twenty-two when he was summoned to the Rebbe’s office on a Saturday night in December 1941.[[191: Author’s interview with Altein.]] The Rebbe had received a letter from the president of the Nusach Ari Congregation in Pittsburgh asking for help in finding a new rabbi. “I want you to go there tomorrow morning,” the Rebbe told the surprised Altein. “Can’t it wait a week until after the nineteenth of Kislev?”[[192: The nineteenth of Kislev is a chasidic holiday marking the release of Chabad’s founder from czarist prison.]] Altein asked. “No,” said the Rebbe. “Leave immediately. I will send them a message that you are coming.” The next day was Sunday, December 7. On the train, Altein heard the news of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. No one at the congregation knew he was coming. A few days later, he discovered the Rebbe’s unopened telegram in the synagogue. Altein took a trolley across town to the home of the synagogue’s president to introduce himself. He thought Altein was a fundraiser and was astonished to learn that his letter to the Rebbe had prompted the appearance of this young bearded rabbi, ready to work. A debate was raging about the congregation’s future. The neighborhood had changed, and most Jews had moved out. The president was considering relocating the congregation to a new area and possibly following the trend of the time, affiliating with the Conservative movement. Altein reported the controversy to the Rebbe, resulting in his intervention. The Rebbe wrote to Yaakov Schiff, one of the synagogue’s religious members, “I have sent my student Rabbi Altein to examine the situation closely and explore options such as moving to another area.”[[193: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 6, letter to Schiff dated third night of Chanukah 5702 (December 16, 1941).]] Not only did the Rebbe want the synagogue to remain Orthodox, he also had bigger ideas. He instructed Altein, “Once you settle the issues with the synagogue, you should begin to consider establishing a yeshivah ketanah (elementary-level yeshivah).”[[194: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 6, letter to Altein dated third night of Chanukah 5702 (December 16, 1941).]] By Chanukah, Altein had opened a Hebrew school and enrolled some of the local children. In the coming months, the Rebbe directed the establishment of a local branch of Agudas Chassidei Chabad to plot a new direction for the synagogue.[[195: Igrot Kodesh 6:180–81, letters to Altein and the community dated 3 Shevat, 5702 ( January 21, 1942). From the letters it seems the Rebbe sent Rabbi Jacobson to Pittsburgh to restructure the Chabad organization and prepare the way for Altein to begin a variety of programs.]] Altein continued to expand the programs, starting a Mesibot Shabbat club for children on Shabbat afternoons. With time, Altein returned to New York, where he was instrumental in setting up other schools, including a yeshivah in the Bronx. In 1943, matters took a leap forward when the Rebbe sent Rabbi Sholom Posner[[196: Rabbi Sholom Posner was born in 1895 and died in 1994.]] to Pittsburgh. Posner was a Russian refugee who had studied in the yeshiva in Lubavitch. After marrying, he moved to Palestine and then to the US in 1930, settling in Chicago, where he served as the sexton in a local synagogue. A business opportunity arose, and he traveled to New York to seek the Rebbe’s advice.[[197: Leibel Estrin, “Righteous Lives,” available at: https://www.academia.edu/40639749/RIGHTEOUS_LIVES_THE_STORY_OF_RABBI_SHOLOM_AND_REBBETZIN_CHAYA_POSNER_AND_THE_YESHIVA_SCHOOLS.]] The Rebbe had other ideas, telling him, “There’s so much work to be done in America and I have so few people to do it. Better go to Pittsburgh and set up a school.” Posner was forty-two. His mother tongue was Yiddish, his English was sparse, and he had no experience in running a school.[[198: Interviews with Rabbi Sholom and Chaya Posner conducted by the National Council of Jewish Women in 1974. Audio recording available at: https://historicpittsburgh.org/islandora/object/pitt:ais196440.353.]] Leaving his wife Chaya and children in Chicago, he headed to Pittsburgh. Noticing his absence, a synagogue member asked his wife where he’d gone. She responded that he was in Pittsburgh to open a yeshivah. Surprised, the man told her, “Hair will grow on my palm before there is a yeshivah in Pittsburgh.” Jewish leaders in Pittsburgh were not very welcoming. “We already have shuls and kosher businesses,” they said. “Why should we open a yeshivah in Pittsburgh when there are bigger cities without one?” Local Orthodox rabbis were opposed, fearing the new yeshivah would draw children away from their congregational Hebrew schools. The Jews of Pittsburgh were rushing down the road of assimilation. They were not interested in a rabbi adorned in European chasidic garb who reminded them of the world they had left behind. When Chaya Posner joined her husband, they had a hard time renting an apartment in the Jewish neighborhood. “People [ Jews] did not want to rent to a religious Jew with a beard,” she recalled. Unfazed, Posner hit the streets, going door to door to register students. He later recalled this as “the most difficult part.” With his long rabbinic coat and his European look, he found it difficult to attract the of the local Jews. He wrote to the Rebbe repeatedly about his difficulties. He responded, “You dig a hole and plant seeds, and I will water it with my tears.”[[199: Miriam Rosenblum recalls that Chaya Posner told this story at a convention of Chabad women in Pittsburgh. Interview with JEM, Oral History Project.]] Posner’s planting and the Rebbe’s tears began to bear fruit when, finally, Posner was able to enroll five children. One was Kehos Weiss, whose parents were impressed with Posner’s sincerity. “My parents agreed – not only because they wanted a Jewish education [for me], but because they admired Rabbi Posner’s persistence,” Weiss said. The children were of different ages and in five different grades. Posner put them in one class and taught them all on assorted levels. By the end of the year, there were twenty-seven students. With this growth came the need for money. Posner had never raised a dime in his life. “There was no financial support from New York. I had teachers to pay, and for three months I hesitated to fundraise.” With no choice, he began to ask local Jews for help. With time, Posner cultivated supporters, and the yeshivah continued to grow. They soon purchased a home to house the small school. By 1950, it boasted one hundred students.[[200: Today the yeshivah has more than four hundred students on two campuses in Pittsburgh.]] Avraham Hecht and his five brothers[[201: Shlomo Zalman, Moshe Yitzchak, Avraham, and Yankel ( J.J.) all became rabbis. Shalom opened a Judaica bookstore, and Peretz was a businessman.]] were also part of the first cadre of activists the Rebbe drafted. They were American boys, brash, outspoken, and articulate. Avraham graduated from yeshivah in 1942. He wanted to study longer, but “the Rebbe wanted us to go out to open yeshivas.” The Rebbe told him, “In wartime, even a private can become a general. When the general gets shot, the private steps up.” At twenty, Avraham was sent to Worcester to start a yeshivah. “We met with the local rabbi and used his shul. Things were rough in the beginning. We started with just one kid.” Shortly afterward, in 1942, his newly married brother Moshe and his bride Rivkah[[202: Rivkah Hecht nee Krinsky was born in 1919 and died in 2010. For more information, see “Senior Chabad Representative, Mrs. Rivkah Hecht, 91,” available at: https://www.lubavitch.com/senior-chabad-representative-mrs-rivkah-hecht-91/.]] came to Worcester as well. She grew up in Boston, where she was the only religious girl in the city, and graduated from the Hebrew Teachers College there. She recalls, “I was pushed right into education. We knew the Rebbe was not going to sit still and whatever the Rebbe said, we were going to get it done.”[[203: Author’s interview with Rivkah Hecht.]] The Rebbe continued to send out his students. At times there was a local request; other times the rabbi would simply arrive and drum up support. Except for Posner, they were all young men in their early twenties who had studied in Brooklyn. They were full of passion, empowered by the mission the Rebbe entrusted them with. In Buffalo, Herschel Fogelman started a school with just a few children. The same story happened in Rochester, Philadelphia, and a dozen other cities. Young women were enlisted to teach. As the young rabbis married, their wives shared in the leadership of the schools. Yitzchok Groner was sent to Buffalo, Tzvi Shusterman to Rochester, and Hershel Fogelman soon moved to Worcester. In city after city, the Rebbe opened one yeshivah after another. Alongside the yeshivas, girls schools were opened.[[204: This was a major innovation. In Europe, Chabad did not operate schools for girls. Perhaps the Rebbe felt it was not needed in Poland due to other schools that had been opened along the lines of the one established by Sarah Schenirer.]] When the Rebbe received a request to open a school in California, he responded that he hoped to reach that area in the future. Rivkah Hecht says, “We were the pioneers.”[[205: Author’s interview with Rivkah Hecht.]] After a few years in Worcester, she and her husband Moshe moved to New Haven, Connecticut, where they started a school with just four students. “The locals knew little of Yiddishkeit. There were shuls with old Yiddish-speaking European rabbis who could not connect to American Jews.” The Rebbe was sending the opposite: young American rabbis. “Our arrival was a turning point for the community.” Moshe “had a beard but he spoke in English. He wowed them.” And it wasn’t just the families; “students from Yale also came.” The Rebbe was concerned with their progress and “wanted to know how everything was getting on.” He corresponded regularly with the Hechts. “I have tons of letters,” Rivkah said. The Rebbe supported Released Time, the program that permitted public school students to leave school for one hour a week for religious instruction. The program had been active in many states since 1914, but it was only approved in New York in 1940.[[206: Released Time began in Indiana in 1914. By 1922, the program was in twenty-three states. In New York the statute approving Released Time was signed into law on April 9, 1940 by Governor Lehman. In November that year, the Board of Education of the City of New York published regulations for program. See Shiurei Limud HaDas (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2006), appendix.]] Rabbi Chaim Tzvi Konikov observed Christian groups offering religious instruction for public school children for an hour a week, and he started a program of his own for Jewish children in his Brooklyn synagogue. Konikov informed the Rebbe, who seized on the idea, viewing it as an opportunity to reach out to Jewish children who were not receiving any Jewish education.[[207: Shiurei Limud HaDas, chap. 2.]] The Rebbe directed the newly established Merkos L’Inyonei Chinuch to organize the program for students in New York public schools. “A law has been established that one hour a week, on Wednesdays, children are released from school at 2:00 p.m. instead of 3:00 p.m. to attend religious instruction.”[[208: Ibid., letter dated 19 Shevat, 5703 (February 14, 1943).]] He detailed the conditions: Instruction was not permitted to take place on public school grounds, so the children needed to be transported to nearby synagogues. Parental permission was required, and the teachers were responsible for the children getting home afterward. Merkos created a special division, the National Committee for the Furtherance of Jewish Education (NCFJE), to coordinate the program. The youngest Hecht brother, Yankel, was one of the first teachers at age eighteen – and he soon became the program’s director. Within a year, three thousand children attended weekly. Three years later, the number doubled to six thousand, and the National Committee announced its goal of reaching ten thousand. Students and volunteers from yeshivas and Jewish high schools were enlisted to teach. It was a daunting administrative challenge to coordinate the hundreds of teachers at multiple venues throughout the five boroughs. Teachers’ Guides were created with lesson plans that included stories from our sages, Torah, history, and traditions. The National Committee hosted large fundraising dinners to cover the costs. Until this point, only Christian groups had operated Released Time programs. The Rebbe’s creation of a Jewish program sparked opposition by New York’s Jewish leaders. Jewish Life reported, “Orthodox groups feared it would undermine the already low standard of Jewish education.”[[209: Saul Adelson, “How Can Jewish Children Be Given a Jewish Education?” in Jewish Life, February 1946.]] Critics complained that just one hour of religious instruction a week would have limited impact. Some rabbis worried that parents might abandon synagogue Hebrew schools, an important source of members and income, because of the free one-hour-a-week program. Liberal Jews were staunchly opposed to what they considered a breach of the separation of church and state. Reform leaders declared that it would “jeopardize the very basis of American life.”[[210: “Central Conference of American Rabbis Opposed ‘Released Time’ in Public Schools,” JTA, June 27, 1947, available at: https://www.jta.org/archive/central-conference-of-american-rabbis-opposes-released-time-in-public-schools.]] The American Jewish Congress lamented that Released Time “creates antagonism among students of various faiths and violates the principle of separation of church and state.”[[211: “Opposition to Released Time Religious Teaching Voiced at Jewish Congress Parley,” JTA, January 20, 1949, available at: https://www.jta.org/archive/opposition-to-released-time-religious-teaching-voiced-at-jewish-congress-parley.]] Jewish groups, such as the ADL, American Jewish Congress, and the American Jewish Committee, didn’t just issue press releases; they backed a lawsuit against Released Time.[[212: “Jewish Organizations File Brief in N.Y. Court Against Release Time Program in Schools,” JTA, June 1, 1951, available at: https://www.jta.org/archive/jewish-organizations-file-brief-in-n-y-court-against-release-time-program-in-schools.]] But the US Supreme Court rejected their arguments that government was supporting religion, ruling in favor of Released Time.[[213: In 1952, the Supreme Court ruled in Zorach v. Clauson with Justice William Douglas writing for the majority, “The Released Time program involves neither religious instruction in public school classrooms nor the expenditure of public funds.” Justice Felix Frankfurter, who was Jewish, was in the minority that did not support Released Time in public schools. See Zorach v. Clauson, https://www.oyez.org/cases/1940-1955/343us306. To read the court’s decision, see Shiurei Limud HaDas, appendix.]] The Rebbe was unbothered by the critics. To him, the burning issue remained the large numbers of Jewish children who were still receiving little or no Jewish education. As the Rebbe wrote to the organizers of Released Time, “Thousands of Jewish children could have been lost to Judaism, but you have brought the warmth of Yiddishkeit into thousands of homes, to parents and to children.”[[214: Igrot Kodesh 9:205, letter dated Tu BeShevat 5707 (February 5, 1947).]] Certainly, the Rebbe would have preferred that all Jewish children attend full-time Jewish schools, but understanding that this was unrealistic, he created multiple options for children at all levels of observance. In 1942, Yitzchok Groner and Moshe Kazarnovsky were asked to organize a children’s parade on the intermediate days of Passover in Crown Heights. Rabbi Hodakov told them that the children should hold placards urging people to observe Jewish traditions. They did so, leading three hundred children down busy Eastern Parkway, which was lined with tall apartment buildings full of Jewish residents who often sat and socialized on the benches that adorned the broad parkway. “The benches were packed with Jews,” Groner remembers. The Rebbe watched the parade from his second-floor window as it passed by his residence. The Ramash told Groner that the Rebbe was enthusiastic about the parade’s success.[[215: Interview with Rabbi Yitzchok Groner, JEM Oral History Project.]] This parade represented a change in mindset: Judaism should not be limited to the synagogue or home, but celebrated publicly. The Passover parade was a precursor to the Lag BaOmer parades that the seventh Rebbe began in the early 1950s. They have now become the norm in Jewish communities worldwide.[[216: The first Lag BaOmer parade was held in 1953 on Eastern Parkway. See Phreddy Nosanwisch, “Recalling Lag BaOmer 1953, Montreal Rabbi Marches On,” available at: chabad.org/3672868.]] The Rebbe’s educational strategy was innovative, part of a new paradigm that would mold Chabad in the decades to come. First, the Rebbe inspired young men and women to dedicate their lives to securing a Jewish future, placing his full confidence in these young Jewish leaders. This was far different from the Russian experience, where his Chasidim were steeped in decades of rich religious tradition as graduates of the intellectual and spiritual experience of the yeshivah in Lubavitch. In Russia, they were fighting to preserve tradition. In the US, they were going against the mainstream that promoted assimilation. The Rebbe pushed his students to be outgoing, positive, self-confident, and innovative. He had great trust in the young. The Rebbe once remarked about two of the Hecht brothers, “With Avraham and Yankel, I can take over all of America.”[[217: E.L. Tenenbaum, Rabbi J.J. Hecht (Mosaica Press, 2022), 37.]] He believed in his students and empowered them to become Jewish leaders. Secondly, the Rebbe insisted that each school develop its own base of local supporters. He saw his young emissaries as entrepreneurs, building partnerships with local Jews. The Rashag, based in Brooklyn, was director of the yeshivah system. He did offer some funds, but it wasn’t enough to cover the growing budgets in over a dozen cities. Chabad’s system of fundraising, encouraging partnership between the shliach and his local community, was starting to form. Thirdly, the Rebbe was not deterred by critics. He was an innovator. When others said, “That’s not the way we do things” or “We must not cross the separation of church and state,” the Rebbe forged forward. When it came to saving Jewish youth from assimilation, he remained focused on the goal. Finally, the Rebbe would not change tradition to suit the whims of the time. His motto, “America is no different,” asserted that traditional Judaism could flourish in the new world, a concept that ran counter to the dominant mentality. The liberal Jewish movements were experiencing their greatest growth as they made changes to Jewish tradition, modernizing Judaism. The Orthodox were in free fall, losing members; the timid leadership was anxious about saving its core. The Rebbe described America as a “medinah shel chesed,” a county of kindness, grace, and opportunity. He believed that you did not have to give up your identity to succeed. You could simultaneously be a proud Jew and a proud American. He urged his students not to discard their traditional appearance – to grow beards, dress as Chasidim, and celebrate their unique traditions – and at the same time take part in the society that offered them freedom and opportunity. Few grasped the broad vision of the Rebbe. The small, insecure Orthodox world would take decades to develop self-confidence and place outreach as an important value.[[218: Even then, the strategy was profoundly different from that of Chabad, which sends young couples to communities devoid of religious structure with a mandate to build from the bottom up. The approach of the Lithuanian yeshivah community to outreach is to establish kollels, centers of learning, with a group of young couples. These centers are usually only in areas with an existing Orthodox community. In essence, it is an extension of their worldview of “fortress Judaism,” much like the idea of the US cavalry creating forts on the prairie during the Indian wars. Chabad rabbis and rebbetzins create new communities in the areas they move to and become an integral part of those communities. In more recent years, the yeshivah community has set up outreach programs at universities. Here their strategy is dramatically different than Chabad. They attempt to enroll as many students as possible in study programs in Israel and other locations. Chabad campus centers, on the other hand, are an essential part of Jewish life on campus, creating many gateways for Jewish identity by designing programs that reflect the needs of the students while encouraging a stronger bond with tradition. While Chabad also promotes Jewish study programs in yeshivas, it connects all Jewish students with their heritage. Other outreach programs, such as the flagship teen network NCSY, created by the Orthodox Union, would not be established until the 1950s. As a rule, NCSY is based in existing Orthodox synagogues. It does outstanding work bolstering Jewish identity among teens, including public school students.]] Rivkah Hecht, one of the Rebbe’s pioneers, noted, “We knew the Rebbe was not going to sit still. The Orthodox world could not understand him.”[[219: Author’s interview with Rivkah Hecht.]] In time, Orthodox communities would come to see the success of his path and emulate it. One of those first steps was in 1944, when Torah Umesorah, a new Orthodox initiative led by Rabbi Shraga Feivel Mendlowitz, took the first tentative steps toward opening day schools. Instead of being upset by the “competition,” the Rebbe was pleased that others were waking up to the value of such endeavors. Encouraging the yeshivah students and young women to become activists contrasted with the approach of the Lithuanian-style yeshivas in the US. They argued that the pursuit of Jewish knowledge was the highest ideal, while the Rebbe prioritized arresting the trend of assimilation. These differing approaches for securing a Jewish future reflected the different strategies taken two decades earlier in Russia. When Communism attempted to destroy religious life, the Lithuanian yeshivas abandoned the country to preserve Jewish scholarship. The Rebbe, however, remained in Russia, putting his life on the line for the welfare of all Jews. Now again in the US, the same debate emerged. Underlying it was the question of how Jews should respond to the freedoms of modernity: Was it better to withdraw into insular communities or to engage the broader society? Chasidic philosophy argues that the purpose of a Jew is to reveal the potential sanctity in the world around him. In contrast, the yeshivas[[220: The remarkable success of Jewish learning is reflected in the vast numbers studying Torah today in such yeshivas as Lakewood, proving that the insular approach has great merit. At the same time, these institutions have a marginal influence on Jewish life beyond their communities.]] stressed protecting oneself from negative influences. In the decades to come, these varied ideologies would each offer its vision for the future of traditional Judaism in the US and around the world. Unfortunately, liberal Jewish communities, which dominated the American Jewish landscape in the midcentury, failed to see the value of Jewish day schools for many years. They resisted investing communal funds in schools and ardently opposed government funding of any sort, claiming it would infringe on the separation of church and state. The opposition was rooted in the belief that the key to Jewish success was integration into society, and the public school system was the avenue for that aspiration. Yeshivas and day schools would only push Jews inward and limit their options for higher education and employment opportunities. The Rebbe rejected all those ideas and created a model that would be emulated in time by all segments of the Jewish community. At this point, Chabad was a sideshow in Brooklyn, its numbers small and its influence negligible. Few could imagine that the network of schools and educational programs the Rebbe launched during the war years would be just the first steps in a broad vision to change the course of US Jewry. After the Rebbe’s passing, his successor, the seventh Rebbe, would take his vision to new levels in the second half of the twentieth century. The foundation for the change that would blossom into a global Jewish renaissance was the Rebbe’s pioneering of Jewish education in the early 1940s. There is no question that many other Orthodox groups made important contributions to the rebirth of traditional Judaism in the US. But it was the Rebbe’s declaration of “America iz nisht aderesh” when he stepped foot on US soil that was the turning point. He reversed the course of Orthodox defensiveness, instead going on the offensive. He was an innovator, doing things that others thought were impossible but later ended up emulating. Between 1940 and 1950, ninety-seven Jewish schools opened in the US, a dramatic increase from the twenty-eight that had opened in the previous twenty-two years.[[221: Sarna, American Judaism (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004), chap. 5.]] One-third of these ninety-seven schools were started by the Rebbe,[[222: Many of those schools established by the Rebbe, such as in Pittsburgh, Worcester, and Boston, continue till today. Others closed after a time. Merkos L’Inyonei Chinuch established a network of girls’ schools in tandem with the yeshivas. For a detailed overview of the system the Rebbe founded, see Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit, chap. 41–58.]] mostly during the war years. His pioneering efforts showed that schools could flourish not just in the bastions of Orthodoxy in Brooklyn, but also in less traditional and smaller communities. His efforts also revealed that families could be swayed to leave public schools. Additionally, the Rebbe’s system of developing local financial support showed that American Jews were willing to invest in day school education. When it came to revitalizing Jewish life, the Rebbe was not only focused on advancing the work of Chabad. His scope was far-reaching; he sought to encourage any group that could enhance tradition. At times he challenged other organizations to broaden their horizons, even stepping in to help when they faced moments of crisis. This began immediately with the Rebbe’s landing on US shores. On Purim, less than a week after he disembarked, the Rebbe appealed to Rabbi Dr. Leo Jung[[223: Jung was one of the leading Orthodox rabbis of the first half of the twentieth century, eventually serving as rabbi of the Jewish Center in New York. He was active in the construction of aesthetically pleasing mikvehs. See Dovi Safier, “Man of Action: The Life & Times of Rabbi Leo Jung,” available at: https://mishpacha.com/man-of-action/.]] to help complete a new mikveh in Manhattan. Rabbi Joseph Lookstein had visited the Rebbe a few days before and told him the project had stalled. The Rebbe asked Jung, who had previously championed creating ascetically pleasing mikvehs in the US, to help. “Everything must be done to finish the mikveh as soon as possible,” he wrote. “You will be blessed with much goodness, physically and spiritually.”[[224: Igrot Kodesh 5:41, letter dated Purim 5700 (March 25, 1940). The Rebbe had written to Jung on other occasions. While he was in Riga, he sent him a letter thanking him for his efforts to help him escape from Warsaw. Lookstein was a prominent modern Orthodox New York rabbi. Neither was part of the chasidic community. The Rebbe’s involvement reflects an interest in advancing traditional Judaism in a variety of ways. It’s difficult to ascertain why the Rebbe felt he should prod Jung in particular to help with the project. Perhaps the Rebbe’s personal interest would inspire him to assist with a project that it seems he had been hesitant to support.]] At times, the Rebbe even intervened to assist those who could be seen as his competitors.[[225: While Rabbi Shraga Feivel Mendlowitz came from a chasidic background and for years gave a class in Tanya, he was not a Chabad follower. He had great respect for the Rebbe but differed with him on many issues. He made a donation to the opening of Tomchei Temimim in the US. According to Avraham Hecht, when some Torah Vodaath students transferred to the newly opened Chabad yeshivah, he was dismayed. To a degree, Torah Vodaath was in competition with the newly opened US Chabad yeshivah, but the Rebbe saw the greater value of Torah and recognized the unique role of Torah Vodaath as a vital center of Jewish learning. See Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael; Dalfin, Lakewood and Lubavitch.]] During the war,[[226: The exact date of the crisis remains unclear. It seems to have occurred in the early 1940s; Rabbi Shmuel Knopfler says it was 1941. Interview with Knopfler, JEM Oral History Project.]] America’s flagship yeshivah, Torah Vodaath, faced a major financial crisis. Salaries were late, the yeshivah was in debt, and the mortgage was in arrears. The bank gave the yeshivah a deadline: It had three weeks to bring the payments current or the property would be seized, rendering the yeshivah homeless. This threat was a breaking point for Rabbi Shraga Feivel Mendlowitz. He simply saw no way to obtain the funds before the deadline. Years later, in a speech at Torah Vodaath in 1958, the rosh yeshivah, Rabbi Shmuel Kuselewitz,[[227: Rabbi Shmuel Kuselewitz was the author of Netivot Shmuel and ordained the rabbis at Yeshivah Torah Vodaath. The yeshivah conducted an annual memorial program on the yahrzeit of Rabbi Shlomo Hyman (1893–1944), who became rosh yeshivah of Torah Vodaath in 1936. At the 1958 memorial, Kuselewitz recalled that the Rebbe had lauded Rabbi Hyman as a true scholar. He then shared the story of how the Rebbe intervened to save the yeshivah. Kuselewitz had an affinity for Chabad and made a bequest to Chabad yeshivas in his will. See Dalfin, Lakewood and Lubavitch, chap. 4.]] described the looming catastrophe.[[228: Mayer Plotkin, a student of Torah Vodaath at that time, was present at the speech. He says he and his fellow students were surprised to hear the story. Interview with Plotkin, JEM Oral History Project.]] Mendlowitz, who had dedicated his life to the yeshivah, was distraught and keeping the gravity of the situation to himself. “He felt that because of him, Torah Vodaath was going to be closed.” He placed appeals in newspapers, but little money came in, and the deadline was getting closer. One day, he was surprised to receive a phone call from the Rebbe’s office inquiring about the situation.[[229: Rabbi Shmuel Knopfler verified the story of the Rebbe’s role in saving the yeshivah with Rabbi Yosef Wilner, who served as principal of Torah Vodaath when Knopfler’s son attended school there in 2002. Interview with JEM Oral History Project.]] “I didn’t want to share the yeshivah’s precarious state with anyone,” Mendlowitz disclosed years later.[[230: Shortly before he passed away on September 7, 1948 (3 Elul), Mendlowitz told the story to a group of close friends who had gathered at his bedside. He said he did not want to take the secret to his grave. See Rabbi Shmuel Knopfler, “Lubavitcher Rebbe Saved Yeshivah Torah Vodaas from Foreclosure,” available at: https://dusiznies.blogspot.com/2016/06/lubavitcher-rebbe-saved-yeshiva-torah.html. For additional details, see Dalfin, Lakewood and Lubavitch, chap. 1; JEM Oral History Project interview with Knopfler.]] “I dismissed the Rebbe by saying that everything was in order.” A few hours later, the Rebbe’s office rang again, and the secretary insisted that he reveal the true gravity of the crisis. “I had no reason to think the Lubavitcher Rebbe’s financial state was better than mine. I certainly didn’t think he could help me. Finally, after the secretary’s repeated requests, I told him of the yeshivah’s plight and about the contents of the letter I received from the bank.” The Rebbe’s secretary relayed a message of encouragement from the Rebbe: “In my day, no yeshivah will be closed – not in Russia and not in America.” As the deadline neared, the Rebbe’s office called repeatedly for updates. Things remained bleak. The funds were due on a Monday, Mendlowitz recalled. “The Friday before, the Rebbe’s secretariat called again, asking to whom the money had to be paid and how. I was utterly appalled by this meddling, but out of respect I gave them all the information they requested.” On Monday, Mendlowitz says, “I sat hopelessly in my office, resigned to the fact that in another few hours the bank officials would arrive and close the yeshivah.” That’s when he heard a knock on the door. Standing there was the Rebbe’s emissary with an envelope. Rabbi Shmuel Kuselewitz recalled the words of the messenger: The Rebbe asked that before I give you this envelope, I advise you of some facts: When he was in Russia, he had to fight against the strongest country in the world so that the Torah would not be extinguished. The biggest tyrant in the world was Joseph Stalin, and the Rebbe paid no attention to him. Whoever needed help in order to strengthen Torah, he helped them. He didn’t ask if the recipient was Chabad or not. Whatever they needed – a mikveh, a kosher butcher, a teacher – he tried to supply it. He did whatever he could so the light of Torah would not be extinguished. His emissaries were caught, shot, and killed, and he then supported their orphans and widows. And still he would send another person to replace the one who perished. And now divine providence has brought him to the United States of America where there is freedom of religion, and he is pained to learn that a major yeshivah with thousands of students is going to be closed – not because Stalin in Russia wants to get rid of Judaism, but because the Jews in America don’t care. This the Rebbe cannot abide. He is willing to put his own movement in danger – because he also has debts to repay – but he is giving you a check for the whole amount you need, in order that the Torah not be extinguished. Please repay it as soon as possible, because everything the Rebbe has built up is now in danger. The money was eventually repaid, but as Kuselewitz pointed out, “When he gave it, he could not have been sure that that would happen. That’s real self-sacrifice.” This was not the only time the Rebbe interceded to save a Jewish school from financial woes. In 1946, the Hebrew Parochial School faced a financial crisis. Established in 1942 in Chicago’s West Side, it would evolve into one of the city’s premier Jewish schools, the Arie Crown Hebrew Day School.[[231: “About Our History,” available at: https://www.ariecrown.org/apps/pages/index.jsp?uREC_ID=274544&type=d&pREC_ID=547914.]] When it opened, the Rebbe urged his Chicago followers to support the new school. He also sent “the pedagogical expert with extensive experience in the field of education, Rabbi Chaim Hodakov” to help organize the school.[[232: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 12, letter to Nachum Dovber Reisch dated 2 Elul, 5700 (September 5, 1940). This volume includes extensive correspondence to Jewish leaders in Chicago about the school.]] Chabad rabbis including Zalman Posner taught there. Just a few years after it opened, there was no money to pay the mortgage, and a board meeting was called to discuss closing the school. Yankel Katz, a Chabad follower, was on the board. Two years earlier, the Rebbe had written to him, “You should use your influence to benefit the school.”[[233: The exceptionally long letter – ten pages – is replete with encouragement to strengthen Judaism in Chicago. Igrot Kodesh 8:31, letter dated 12 Marcheshvan, 5704 (November 10, 1943).]] The idea of giving up and closing troubled Katz, who told his fellow board members that the Rebbe had supported the school. “We can’t do anything without first contacting the Rebbe. I will call him.” There was no phone in the meeting room, so Katz collected quarters from the board members and headed outside to the nearest payphone. Avraham Reese, another board member, says the Rebbe asked how much money was needed, what time the meeting had started that night, and what the address of the school was. He then instructed Katz: “Set a meeting for tomorrow night at the same time and everything will be taken care of.” The board members “were confused, wondering what’s going to happen tomorrow.” Despite their skepticism, they agreed to come back again. The next night, as Reese opened the gate to the building, he was surprised to see a group of obviously affluent people waiting there. Thinking they might be attending another event in the building, he asked, “Why are you here? Is there a wedding happening tonight?” They answered, “We came for the meeting.” They explained that they had been contacted by the Rebbe and asked to help. “The Rebbe called in his favors,” they said. The meeting started, and “within a couple of minutes the problem was solved” as they pledged the funds needed.[[234: JEM Oral History Project interview with Ephraim Fishel Katz, nephew of Yaakov Katz.]] The Rebbe even intervened to bolster institutions whose worldview differed from his own. He worked behind the scenes to ensure that Rabbi Yosef Dov Soloveitchik[[235: Rabbi Yosef Dov Soloveitchik (1903–83) was born in Russia to a distinguished rabbinic family. His grandfather was Rabbi Chaim Brisker and his great-grandfather was the Netziv, Rabbi Naftali Tzvi Yehudah Berlin. Rabbi Yosef Dov studied in Berlin under Rabbi Chaim Heller and received a doctorate in 1932. That year he immigrated to the US, settling in Boston. As rosh yeshivah of Yeshivah University, Rabbi Soloveitchik would emerge as one of the leading rabbinic figures in postwar Jewry, ordaining over two thousand rabbis. See Rabbi Aaron Rakeffet, The Rav: The World of Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik (Ktav Publishing).]] would be appointed rosh yeshivah of Yeshivah University.[[236: The Rebbe’s intervention to secure the appointment of Rabbi Soloveitchik is more interesting because there is no question that the Rebbe’s views on Torah study were different than those advocated by Yeshivah University. In college-age Chabad yeshivas, there is no secular education; it’s a classic approach to Jewish learning with an exclusive focus on Torah study. Yeshivah University departed from that model by integrating college-level academics with Torah study. Many leading rabbis were highly critical of this innovation. Still, the Rebbe, while not endorsing the educational philosophy of Yeshivah University, took a different view. It seems he wanted to ensure that YU would be the best institution possible and that it would be led by an outstanding scholar like Rabbi Soloveitchik. The Rebbe visited YU during his 1929 trip to the US, according to Rabbi Zevulun Charlop, former dean of YU. He says that his father “brought the Frierdiker Rebbe to Yeshivas Rabbeinu Yitzchak Elchonon (YU).” The Rebbe had been invited by Dr. Revel, and he gave “a very good shiur.” Interview with Rabbi Zevulun Charlop, JEM Oral History Project.]] In 1941, Rabbi Moshe Soloveichik passed away, having served as rosh yeshivah since 1929. A leading candidate to succeed him was his son Rabbi Yosef Dov, then a rabbi in Boston. He had graduated from the University of Berlin with a degree in philosophy and was considered a world-class talmudic scholar. The young Soloveitchik and the Ramash became friends[[237: Rabbi Soloveitchik shared with Rabbi Chaim Cement, a Chabad rabbi in Boston, a humorous anecdote from the time he spent with the Ramash in Berlin. One Purim, the Rebbe was celebrating until late into the night, and he went out to speak publicly in the street. This caused a disruption, and he was arrested; his friend Soloveitchik was contacted to bail him out. When the Ramash was freed, Rabbi Soloveitchik remarked to him that his great-grandfather Rabbi Menachem Mendel, the third Rebbe, had been in prison, and other Chabad rabbis had also been in prison. Now that he had been in prison too, one day he could become a Rebbe! (The first three Rebbes of Chabad were imprisoned in czarist Russia, and the sixth Rebbe was imprisoned by the czarist regime and the Communists.) See “Purim in Berlin,” video available at: chabad.org/640817.]] when they studied together in Berlin.[[238: Rabbi Sholem Kowalsky, a student of Rabbi Soloveitchik, assisted him with many of his personal affairs. He writes, “The Rav told me that he was a great admirer of the Rebbe. He said that their relationship began when they met in Berlin where they were both studying at the University of Berlin. During that period, they would often meet at the home of the Torah scholar Rabbi Chaim Heller. It was in the course of these meetings that a strong friendship developed between the two men, both of whom were destined to become outstanding spiritual leaders of the century.” See Sholem Kowalsky, “The Rebbe and the Rav,” available at: chabad.org/529444. See also David Holzer, The Rav: Thinking Aloud (Holzer Seforim, 2009).]] The Rebbe became acquainted with Soloveitchik when he visited his daughter and son-in-law in Berlin.[[239: Rabbi Dr. Aaron Rakeffet, one of the leading students of the Rav, documents his conversations with the Rav about both the sixth and seventh Rebbes. See Rakeffet, “The Rebbe and the Rav,” available at: https://jewishaction.com/jewish-world/people/rebbe-rav/.]] The board of Yeshivah University was divided on this appointment. Rabbi Dr. Aaron Rakeffet, Soloveitchik’s biographer,[[240: Rakeffet, The Rav.]] says, “It was the Rebbe who sealed the deal.” The Rebbe wrote a letter[[241: Yeshivah University Archives.]] to officials at Yeshivah University saying, “It is my hope that the great, excellent, and renowned gaon,[[242: By using the term “gaon” the Rebbe was endorsing Rabbi Soloveitchik as a world-class scholar.]] Rabbi Yosef Dov Soloveitchik, be selected to sit in his father’s position.” His appointment would “restore the school’s former glory.” His son, Dr. Haym Soloveitchik, says,[[243: Dalfin, Lakewood and Lubavitch, chap. 7.]] “The Rebbe was the deciding factor in my father getting the job.” One of the board members was Abraham Mazer, a supporter of the Rebbe. “The Rebbe called him to ask him to support my father.” Once the board appointed Soloveitchik, the Rebbe sent him a long letter of congratulations in which he recalled the bond between his grandfather, Rabbi Chaim Soloveitchik, and the Rebbe’s father, the Rashab.[[244: In that letter, the Rebbe recalled his father sharing a maamar with Soloveitchik’s grandfather, Reb Chaim Brisker, whom the Rebbe held in great esteem. Chasidic historian Chaim Dalfin opines that “the Rebbe wanted to impress on him that the number one thing he should be concerned about as a newly appointed rosh yeshivah was to instill in his students a G-d-fearing spirit.” See Dalfin, Lakewood and Lubavitch, chap. 7; Igrot Kodesh 5:345.]] The Rebbe encouraged other Jewish groups to raise their horizons and expand them. The Rebbe met the leadership of Young Israel, the budding network of synagogues targeting younger Jews, just before the holidays in 1942. A few weeks later he wrote to them, encouraging them to push ahead on a project “to increase programs for younger people in cities beyond New York.” When Young Israel’s president, Irving (Simcha) Bunim, lamented to the Rebbe about the difficulties of Jewish leadership, the Rebbe responded with a long, inspiring letter. “G-d has given you the opportunity to be involved in communal leadership,” he wrote. The Rebbe told him he should not complain, but rather approach the challenges “with a heart of happiness and joy,” adding that “G-d will give you success in the material and spiritual.”[[245: Igrot Kodesh 6:253, letter to Irving Bunim dated 29 Adar, 5702 (March 18, 1942).]] In a long personal missive to Palestine’s Chief Rabbi Isaac Herzog, the Rebbe advised him to remain above politics. “My deeply honored friend should not stand with any political party. He should express the opinion of the Torah in all his statements.” The Rebbe encouraged Herzog to stand up for Jewish spiritual values for Jewish people the world over. At the time, most Zionist leaders in Israel were secular and antagonistic to traditional Judaism. The Rebbe cautioned Herzog “that it is painful to see the desecration of the sacred” and warned him about being manipulated due to his “deep humility.”[[246: This remarkable letter begins with recollecting the visit of the Rebbe Rashab in Paris, where Herzog’s father (a distinguished rabbi) and mother acted with kindness – “your mother baking challah” for the Rebbe Rashab. He recalls that the Rebbe Rashab had told him that he was impressed when he met the “young Rabbi Herzog in Paris. He is a clear-thinking Torah scholar who not only has vast Torah knowledge but also languages and wisdom [i.e. secular education].” The Rebbe had the letter hand-delivered by one of his prominent Chasidim “who has no knowledge of its contents” and told Herzog that once he read the letter, he should seal it and return it. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 5, letter dated 25 Adar, 5701 (March 24, 1941).]] The Rebbe intervened in Jewish affairs both in the US and globally. He did not fear raising his voice if Jewish values were being trampled on or if Jews were at risk. When the Rebbe discovered the poor quality of prayer books used by American soldiers, he created a new prayer book with English translation. Even seemingly smaller things would prompt the Rebbe to speak up. When he became aware that the Jewish Welfare Board organized a non-kosher Purim party at a US military base, he strongly protested.[[247: A telegram from the Rebbe to Rabbi David De Sola Pool of the Jewish Welfare Board (JWB) dated March 9, 1943 expresses concern about a Purim celebration being held in Camp Grant at which milk and meat were to be served together. This communication prompted a series of letters and telegrams between the Rebbe and the JWB that caused the event to be modified according to Jewish tradition. The JWB also clarified that the event was not actually sponsored by the JWB, but rather by the local B’nai Brith chapter and the United Service Organizations (USO). Subsequently, the Rebbe wrote a long letter to the JWB about the need to provide proper religious services, qualified chaplains, and prayer books to Jewish serviceman. Letter dated April 4, 1943 (28 Adar Bet, 5703), author’s archive.]] Other issues had broader implications. In 1943, more than one thousand Polish refugee children arrived in Palestine. Known as the Children of Tehran, they were primarily from religious families, had made the long trek overland via Russia, and ended up in Iran.[[248: On February 18, 1943, a total of 1,228 refugee children arrived in Palestine. Russia permitted the transit of these children as a result of the Stalin-Sikorski agreement between Poland and Russia.]] From there, they were brought to Eretz Yisrael by the quasi-government Jewish Agency, controlled by the Mapai (Labor Zionist) Party. Mapai leaders like Yaakov Uri saw these children as future supporters. As he said, “these children are not only an object of rescue, but also one of the cornerstones of our future” – a future that was secular and socialist. Mapai ensured that they would abandon their religious roots by placing them on secular kibbutzim without religious teachers, kosher food, or Shabbat observance. According to a 1950 Government Commission of Inquiry,[[249: Zvi Zameret, The Melting Pot in Israel: The Commission of Inquiry Concerning the Education of Immigrant Children During the Early Years of the State (State University of New York Press, 2002).]] “The youth leaders were not religiously observant. They showed no interest in developing a religious aura and lifestyle.”[[250: Zameret, The Melting Pot, chap. 1.]] The forced secular indoctrination of the children alarmed Orthodox leaders. The Gerrer Rebbe[[251: Rabbi Avraham Mordechai Alter (1865–1948), also known as the Imrei Emes.]] requested that the Rebbe raise the alarm amongst American Jews. The Rebbe immediately requested that Orthodox groups publicly call “to transfer the children to a proper educational environment.”[[252: Letter to Agudas Chassidei Chabad, also sent to Orthodox leaders, dated 24 Adar Bet, 5703 (March 31, 1943).]] Two weeks before Passover 1943, the Rebbe issued a letter printed in Jewish newspapers protesting the actions of the Jewish Agency.[[253: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 6, public letter dated 20 Adar Bet, 5703 (April 5, 1943).]] Zionist officials refused to budge.[[254: “Rabbis Protest the Settling of Refugee Children in Non-religious Colony,” JTA, March 7, 1943, available at: https://www.jta.org/archive/rabbis-protest-the-settling-of-refugee-children-in-non-religious-colony.]] Chief Rabbi Herzog cabled US rabbis, writing, “For two months I have waged a bitter battle against Jewish Agency.”[[255: Cable to Agudas Harabonim, April 7, 1943 (2 Nisan, 5703).]] The Rebbe organized a petition of over four hundred American rabbis in support of Rabbi Herzog.[[256: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 6, letter to Rabbi Herzog, including a list of the rabbis, dated 23 Iyar, 5703 (May 28, 1943). See also “Lubavitcher Rebbe Wants Jewish Refugee Children Placed in Religious Institutions,” JTA, May 4, 1943, available at: https://www.jta.org/archive/lubavitcher-rebbe-wants-jewish-refugee-children-placed-in-religious-institutions.]] The Jewish Agency was intractable, rejecting calls to transfer the children to a religious environment. In August, the Rebbe convened US rabbis and outlined a series of proposals including an international ban of donations to the Jewish Agency and public denunciation in all synagogues, “unless the Jewish Agency agrees to the request of Chief Rabbi Herzog.”[[257: Letter with a series of proposals “To the Committee of Rabbis” dated 25 Av, 1943 (August 26, 1943). The actual meeting of Jewish leaders was held at the Rebbe’s office on September 6, 1943 (6 Elul, 5703). The follow-up letter, dated 19 Elul, 5703 (September 19, 1943) includes minutes of the meeting.]] In some countries,[[258: “Rabbis Protest the Settling of Refugee Children in Non-Religious Colony,” JTA, March 7, 1943, available at: https://www.jta.org/archive/chief-rabbi-of-england-supports-palestine-rabbis-in-conflict-with-jewish-agency.]] rabbis indeed began the boycott. With mounting controversy, the Jewish Agency acquiesced, permitting the children to transfer to religious schools.[[259: The public controversy prompted the Jewish Agency to create a Commission of Inquiry in 1943. It was heavily criticized for a lack of objectivity. In 1950, due to the insistence of the religious community, the government set up a second investigation called the Frumkin Commission. It was chaired by Gad Frumkin, whose father was a Chabad Chasid who had welcomed the Rebbe during his 1929 Palestine visit. Frumkin was a judge on the Supreme Court under the British Mandate. The commission reviewed the actions of the Jewish Agency in regard to the children of Tehran, as well as immigrant children from Yemen and other countries. Among its conclusions was that “it was a fatal error” to have secular teachers. It also found that accusations such as the forcible removal of peyos and interference with religious studies were true. It noted that the policies toward the children were driven by “a desire to prepare the immigrants and the youth for membership in the Histadrut (the Labor Zionist Workers organization) and not to strengthen the religious parties.” See Zameret, The Melting Pot, book 2 for the full report.]] In 1942, the JDC began assisting Polish Jewish refugees who had fled the German invasion into Russia.[[260: In 1942, the JDC allocated for $334,000 for Polish refugees, primarily in Russia and Persia (many Polish Jews made their way overland to Persia). However, they did not fund projects for Russian Jews, claiming in their annual report “that J.D.C per se was unable to conduct any program on behalf of Russian Jews. Its officers, directors, and contributors have, in their individual and private capacities, supported the work of the Russian War Relief Society, which has appealed to all Americans.” Report Aiding Jews Overseas, 1942. JDC Archives, folder 158, Administrative Reports.]] The US and Russia had become allies, and sensing an opportunity, the Rebbe turned to the JDC to include Russian Jews. “Nothing is being sent to help Russian Jews for Passover,”[[261: Igrot Kodesh 6:215, letter to the JDC headquarters in New York, dated 12 Adar, 5702 (March 1, 1942). During this period, the Rebbe had extensive correspondence (see Igrot Kodesh, vol. 6) with many Jewish groups to pressure the JDC to change its policy. This included Young Israel, Agudath Israel, the Zionist Federation, and notable public figures such as Chief Rabbi Isaac Herzog. At the time, the United States and Russia were allies, and the Rebbe believed that with the proper approach, they would permit direct aid to Russian Jews from the JDC, as it was nonpartisan and already active in Russia in helping Polish Jews.]] he wrote to them, requesting that the organization allocate $100,000 ($2,000,000 today) for Passover needs. The JDC was uniquely poised “as a nonpartisan group whose purpose is for all Jews, irrespective of party or affiliation.” The Rebbe suggested a two-track approach: First, create a coalition of all US Jewish groups to urge the Russian ambassador in Washington, Maxim Litvinov, “that American Jews wish to help their brethren in Russia.” Second, he wanted to lobby US officials who had close ties to the ambassador.[[262: The Rebbe argued that the JDC should galvanize American Jewish groups. See letter to the JDC (New York) dated 15 Adar, 5702 (March 4, 1942); Igrot Kodesh 6:230–32, letter to Rabbi Ephraim Yolles dated 16 Adar, 5702 (March 5, 1942).]] He believed that Litvinov could be swayed to prevail on the Russian government – “because he values their opinion” – to permit humanitarian aid for Russian Jews. Despite pressure from the Rebbe, the JDC chose not to lobby Washington officials or create a coalition. Instead, they sufficed with sending a telegram directly to Moscow asking for permission to aid Russian Jews. When Moscow rejected the request, the Rebbe bemoaned the situation, saying the perfunctory Russian refusal “was just an excuse” and claiming that if he had approached the Russian ambassador in Washington, he could have secured permission. With Passover coming and nothing accomplished, the Rebbe wrote bitterly to one of his close followers, “It pains me when I see that all the efforts will not bring any result,”[[263: Letter to Ephraim Yolles dated 24 Adar 5702 (March 13, 1942). The Rebbe wrote that the JDC should have begun efforts to assist Russian Jews months earlier. “We will sit and eat at our tables in peace and our brothers and sisters will sit crying without a piece of matzah.”]] adding that the JDC had failed its mandate as the global Jewish responder and was “an embarrassment to the Jewish people.” Europe was flooded with refugees in the postwar period. The Rebbe worked in partnership with the JDC to assist the families, encouraging the organization to provide kosher food in camps in Italy and other locations. In 1947, the JDC sponsored twenty-seven Chabad shochtim (certified kosher slaughterers) who were sent to Ireland to create a kosher meat production plant to provide kosher meat to refugees in Europe.[[264: JDC press release dated September 24, 1947, “JDC Sends 27 Rabbis to Dublin.” Interview with Rabbi Benjamin Gorodetsky, “The JDC sends Lubowitscher shochtim to prepare kosher meat for the survivors.” JDC Archives.]] The Rebbe’s health had been precarious for some time. After the High Holidays in 1944, he began to feel discomfort around his heart.[[265: Levine, Treasures of the Chabad Library, chap. 19.]] The Rebbe was visited regularly by a cardiologist, who instructed him to curtail his schedule and take time to rest. A few days later, the Rebbe wrote, “I am suffering from pain around the heart and my speech is difficult.” The doctors ordered more rest. The Rebbe followed the doctors’ orders, writing in his diary, “I have been resting for four hours, a shame the waste of time. May G-d send me a full recovery.” Despite the discomfort, the Rebbe continued to answer letters and receive visitors. In the coming weeks, the Rebbe wrote of pain and exhaustion, further curtailing his activities. The Rebbe confided to Rabbi Yaakov Yisrael Twerski, “The doctors have ordered me to absolute rest.” Still, his spirits were up as he saw “phenomenal success in spiritual matters.”[[266: Rabbi Yaakov Yisrael Twerski was a chasidic Rebbe in Milwaukee from Hornistopoli in Russia. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 13, letter dated Cheshvan 5705 (October 1944).]] On November 10, the Rebbe issued a brief letter to the general Chabad community, in which he wrote, “Upon the orders of physicians to rest from receiving people, I will answer only by correspondence.”[[267: Igrot Kodesh 8:238, letter dated 21 Cheshvan, 5705 (November 10, 1944).]] Despite these precautions, two days later the Rebbe suffered a heart attack,[[268: The heart attack took place on 26 Cheshvan, 5705 (November 12, 1944). See Levine, Treasures of the Chabad Library.]] triggered by receiving a letter that detailed how the Nazis had murdered the Jews of Riga.[[269: At the beginning of the summer of 1945, Rabbi Shlomo Aharon Kazarnofsky visited Montreal to raise funds to install air conditioning in the Rebbe’s apartment during the humid summer, a very costly undertaking at the time. The doctors felt it would be a great help to the Rebbe’s health, which was still precarious. During the Montreal visit, Kazarnofsky told Rabbi Yitzchak Hendel about the letter that had precipitated the Rebbe’s heart attack. Memoir of Rabbi Yitzchak Hendel.]] Among those killed were some of the Rebbe’s closest Chasidim, including Reb Itche der Masmid, Rabbi Mordechai Cheifetz, Rabbi Yechezkel Feigin, and others. According to the report, they were locked in a synagogue and burned to death.[[270: Riga’s Choral Synagogue was burned on July 4, 1941, with many Jews locked inside. A government memorial with senior government officials is held annually on the site of the ruined synagogue. It is unclear if the initial report the Rebbe received stating that the Chasidim were killed in the synagogue was correct, or if they were murdered in a nearby concentration camp.]] For the next three weeks, the Rebbe rested and slowly regained his strength. Writing to his Chasidim the day before Chanukah, he said, “I would like to thank G-d above for His abundant goodness.” He explained that he had suffered “greatly in the last few weeks,” but the worst was over. In beautiful poetic prose, the Rebbe thanked his Chasidim and dear friends for their “prayers, efforts to spread Torah, and good wishes.” He ended the letter with a prayer for “our brothers and sisters at war in the air, sea, and land, who need the mercy of Heaven to protect them.”[[271: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 8, letter addressed to “My dear friends anash and the lovers of disseminating Torah, G-d-fearing spirit, and strengthening Judaism,” dated 24 Kislev, 5705 (November 10, 1944).]] After a further period of rest, the Rebbe slowly returned to his regular schedule. By late December, he was feeling better. “After a break of six weeks that I was ill, I was able to sit in my office and review books. I am still feeling weak. May G-d give me the strength to have success in my work in spreading Torah and instilling a G-d-fearing spirit, strengthening Judaism with proper education, teaching chasidic philosophy, and recording my memoirs.”[[272: Levine, Treasures of the Chabad Library, diary entry dated 7 Tevet, 5705 (December 23, 1944).]] Many of the letters he sent during the winter months were dictated to his secretary and signed “in the name of the Rebbe.” The Rebbe also wrote chasidic discourses during this period and spent more time in Torah study. “I spent four hours today learning. From 7:00 p.m. till now, I was involved in composing the maamar Lech Lecha,” he wrote in his diary.[[273: Ibid., diary entry dated 18 Cheshvan, 5705 (November 4, 1944); Sefer HaMaamarim, 5705.]] During the winter months, as the Rebbe was slowly recovering, he wrote a long letter[[274: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 8, letter dated 15 Tevet, 5705 (December 31, 1944); Kaploun, trans., Sefer HaSichos, 5705, appendix A.]] to the teachers and rabbis in the network of schools and yeshivas. The missive was designed to inspire them to the “highest degree of mesirat nefesh (self-sacrifice) to disseminate the study of Torah.” Always a storyteller, the Rebbe included the stories of three Chasidim and contrasted their modes of divine service: The first was Rabbi Nachman Zalman, who in the nineteenth century would make a spiritual pilgrimage to Rabbi Menachem Mendel in Lubavitch and spend his entire day, from early morning to late at night, in Torah study, prayer, and meditation. The other two Chasidim were Rabbis Yosef Hillel and Shmuel Chaim. Yosef Hillel had been taught by the elder Chasidim that an individual’s goal should be to inspire others. Rabbi Shmuel Chaim had been sent by the Rebbe’s grandfather, Rabbi Shmuel, to the town of Lutzin, where he “excelled in his educational task” and after a few years “transformed the local townsmen.” The Rebbe explained that his father had told him about these Chasidim, and he contrasted the service of Reb Nachman Zalman, “which focused on the individual,” with that of Yosef Hillel and Shmuel Chaim, “which focused on the public.” Each mode has its advantages, but the Rebbe appealed to the educators and rabbis to emulate the approach of Yosef Hillel and Shmuel Chaim. He explained that each person needed to create a “vessel” for blessings in his life. “That vessel is mesirat nefesh. After all, the true meaning of a Chasid is the ability to forgo one’s own spiritual ego for the sake of another’s welfare.” The worldview articulated in the letter represented the Rebbe’s effort to create a paradigm shift in the attitudes within the Chabad community and beyond during the war years. He urged the rabbis and educators to be role models. “If his personal conduct is upright and springs from positive character traits such as ahavat Yisrael (love of others), the merits of the public are attributed to him,” he wrote. Other voices in the Orthodox community were arguing that the key to changing America was by creating a small cadre of outstanding scholars who would have a trickledown effect on the broader Jewish community. The Rebbe, while giving great value to Jewish scholarship, felt that the crisis of assimilation was extremely acute and more proactive measures were needed. This mirrored the teachings of Rabbi Israel Baal Shem Tov, the founder of Chasidism, which highlighted the innate value of every single Jew. The Rebbe wanted to reach out to the simple Jew, uplift him, and reconnect him to his heritage. This, he believed, was the best strategy to transform American Jewry. Slowly, the Rebbe’s vision was gaining steam. In 1945, Harold Berman wrote in the Toronto Hebrew Journal that the dominant force in US Jewry had been the Conservative and Reform movements. “Both accented Americanism and the need for a thorough integration with it.”[[275: Harold Berman, Toronto Hebrew Journal, June 10, 1945.]] Berman attended the fifth anniversary dinner for the Chabad yeshivas “at the fashionable Hotel Plaza in the heart of the city of New York.” He sensed that the event represented a change in direction for American Jewry when he saw the hotel’s “swank lobby filled with a type of guest new to them.” He explained that in the past, one could expect that the Yiddish-speaking religious Jew would come to America and slowly lose his identity, that those who remained Orthodox were just in a “transition period phenomenon, and that outer husk would gradually be peeled away.” Berman says the advent of Chabad obligates us “to reckon with a changed perspective.” He wondered what kind of American Jewy would exist in the next century. That elegant evening in the hotel was a “glimpse at that ecstatic gathering, a Poland in miniature, transplanted on American soil.” He forecasted that the Rebbe’s approach of recreating old-world Judaism on American soil was the “secret of Jewish survival written in large letters.” With the war coming to an end and peace on the horizon, a new set of challenges loomed. As the allies liberated the concentration camps, the full horror of the Holocaust was coming to light. Jewish refugees were emerging from the conflict, looking to restart their lives, many seeking to flee Europe for America, Eretz Yisrael, and other countries. In the postwar era, Jews became even more comfortable in America. The anti-Semitism of the 1920s and 1930s was fading as Jews fought alongside their fellow citizens, boosting their sense of belonging in the US. Postwar Jewry also began a massive shift to the suburbs, leaving behind the close-knit Jewish community that flourished in Brooklyn and other cities. As these new communities developed, they sparked a boom in the liberal movements; the newer generation loosened their ties with Orthodoxy even more than their parents had. In Palestine, the struggle for independence presented a new set of challenges as conflict with the British Mandate heated up and refugees made their way to Eretz Yisrael. Behind Russia’s Iron Curtain, millions of Jews, including thousands of the Rebbe’s Chasidim, were still being denied the freedom to live full Jewish lives. Weary of decades of Communist oppression, they yearned to escape the harsh regime. The Rebbe, still suffering from frail health, would have to adapt to the emerging patterns and set the direction for his community and the Jewish people in a world that had been rocked by over half a decade of global conflict. In the postwar era, the Rebbe would broaden his horizons again, setting new sights and laying the foundation for the global rebirth of Jewish life.





