The train from Russia crossed into Latvia two days after Simchat Torah.[[1: They arrived on October 21, 1927. “Lubawitscher Rebbe Now in Latvia with Family,” JTA, available at: https://www.jta.org/1927/10/24/archive/lubawitscher-rebbe-now-in-latvia-with-family.]] The boisterous send-off from Leningrad didn’t assuage the heartbreak the Rebbe felt. On the train, he composed a letter to the Chasidim, writing, “The essential connection between us cannot be broken, nor does the fact that distance stands between us break that bond.”[[2: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter dated 24 Tishrei, 5688 (October 24, 1927), “written during the journey on the train.”]] A few weeks later, the Rebbe shared his feelings in a poignant letter[[3: In a very forthcoming letter to Baruch Rizik in Rostov, the Rebbe shared his inner thoughts about leaving Russia some six weeks earlier. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 17, letter dated 10 Kislev, 5788 (December 4, 1927).]] about his departure. “I am parting from beloved friends, and who knows when we will see each other again and where I will go with my staff and suitcase.” He wrote that thousands had filled the station, “full of emotion,” surging in the direction of the train. “In amazement, I stood in the train gazing through the window.” He uttered a prayer to himself: “Hashem, have mercy on Your flock, and bless their families and children. I should merit to see them with joy. Amen, Amen.” The Rebbe passed the night on the train. “Eighteen hours with anguish in the heart, pain in the soul, the darkness of the night, the ringing of the wheels of the train only adding to the sense of sadness.”
His spirits were lifted when just an hour from Riga, the train paused at a station, where Chasidim boarded the train for the last leg of the trip. “Suddenly I heard a loud noise – a large crowd had gathered, singing with joy.” The Latvian Chasidim had been prevented by war and revolution from visiting the Rebbe. “This was the first time we had seen each other in fourteen years.” They began to sing a boisterous song, the same joyous melody Chasidim sang thirty years earlier as they escorted the Rebbe from his chuppah in Lubavitch. An hour later they pulled into Riga.[[4: It was 7:00 a.m. on 25 Tishrei, 5688 (October 21, 1927).]] “Thousands, with no division of party, status, or type, came to see the refugees.” In the train station and the large plaza outside, the Rebbe and his family slowly navigated the crowd. “We could not move. Finally, with difficulty, a way was made for us to travel to the hotel.”
The Rebbe and his family were welcomed to Riga’s tree-lined streets, aesthetically pleasing architecture, and relatively mild climate. After a stay in the hotel, they moved into an apartment in an upscale Jewish area, where a beautiful green park enhanced the end of the street. But the pleasant surroundings did not assuage the Rebbe’s grief and sense of loss. As he wrote, “I desire to live in our country of Russia, where people are putting their lives on the line for Torah and observance in the midst of deprivation.”
The Rebbe had suffered terribly in Russia. “His body was broken,” says chasidic historian Menachem Zigelbaum, “but it didn’t stop him from getting to work uplifting the Jewish community and spreading Judaism and chasidic teachings in Western Europe.” Zigelbaum notes that the Rebbe started from scratch three times in his life: “first after the passing of his father in 1920, then when he arrived in Riga in 1927, and then again when he came to the US in 1940.”[[5: Author’s interview with Zigelbaum.]]
Latvia was a waystation; on the Rebbe’s new stationary, “Riga” was followed by the word “temporary.” “I fled the bad, but I have not yet found the good,” wrote the Rebbe about living in Riga.[[6: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter dated 12 Iyar, 5688 (May 9, 1928). The long letter details the Rebbe’s ordeals in Russia.]] “I was driven from my country and forced to separate from my beloved brothers and friends.” Permanence and stability would continue to be elusive. “The Rebbe resided in Riga for six years and during that extended time, no decision was made on his permanent place of residence,” wrote chasidic historian Rabbi Sholom Ber Levin.[[7: Ibid., Introduction, 22.]] While Riga was his base, the Rebbe spent much time traveling. Some trips were designed to inspire communities, others to meet with Jewish leaders to help Russian Jewry. He spent extended periods of time in Berlin, Vienna, Paris, and the spas of Marienbad to heal his chronic health problems.[[8: Later, after the Rebbe’s trip to the United States, he would be diagnosed with multiple sclerosis, but there were also earlier indications of his weak health.]] In 1929, he made a yearlong trek to Eretz Yisrael and America. Even his family celebrations were not held in Riga. The wedding of the Rebbe’s daughter Chaya Mushka was held in Warsaw, Poland, and the wedding of her younger sister Sheina was in Landwarow, Poland, near the Lithuanian border.
Six years after arriving in Latvia, the Rebbe relocated to Poland. But Poland too would only provide a home for a few years, until the outbreak of World War II compelled the Rebbe to escape to New York. It was only there that the wandering ended, with the Rebbe establishing Chabad’s permanent base in the iconic Gothic-style building at 770 Eastern Parkway. He lived there for the last decade of his life, until his passing in 1950.
Latvia was home to eighty thousand Jews, with about half living in Riga. In 1918, the Latvians overthrew Russian rule and became independent.[[9: Latvian independence lasted until the German invasion in July 1941. In 1945, Soviet troops seized Latvia, making it part of the Soviet Union. It regained its independence in 1991.]] Jews were active in politics, fielding parties in parliamentary elections. In an election held a few months after the Rebbe’s arrival, Latvian Jews earned six seats in the country’s parliament, divided between the religious parties,[[10: Mizrachi (the religious Zionists) and Agudath Israel.]] the Zionists, and their mutual ideological foe, the socialist Bund.
One of the prominent Jewish members of parliament was Rabbi Mordechai Dubin. A devoted Chasid of the Rebbe, he was arguably the most important Jewish leader in Riga, being the chair of the Latvian branch of Agudath Israel[[11: World Agudath Israel (the Agudah) was established by Jewish religious leaders at a conference held in Katowice, Poland in 1912, as a response to the secularization of Jewish life and the opposition of Zionism to traditional Judaism. It unified many of the chasidic groups with the Lithuanian yeshivah community. Chabad did not join the Agudah. In the years to come, the Agudah created branches in many European counties. In Latvia, Agudath Israel became a major influential party. It ran candidates in the national elections in 1922, winning two seats in the first Saeima (parliament). It retained both seats in the second Saeima after the 1925 elections but was reduced to one seat in the 1928 elections. The 1931 elections saw the party win two seats in the fourth Saeima. However, after the 1934 Latvian coup d’état, multi-party elections were not held again until 1990. Today, Agudath Israel is an important religious party with seats in the Israeli Knesset and a major presence in the US and European countries. In 2019, it organized the Siyum HaShas, the celebration marking the completion of the cycle of Talmud study, at MetLife stadium in New Jersey with some ninety thousand in attendance.]] and a city council member. Because of the fractious nature of Latvian politics, Dubin’s party sometimes cast the crucial swing vote, giving him great influence in political affairs. Dubin was also the chairman of the kehillah, the official government-recognized Jewish community, and he was well respected by all. Dubin helped everyone, even his ideological opponents. When (Zeev) Latski Bertoldi, editor of the anti religious newspaper Frimorgen asked him to help jailed Soviet writer David Bergelson, Dubin used all his connections to free him. Says Margolin “Latski-Bertoli had on a daily basis attacked Dubin in his newspaper, now the conversation was about saving a fellow Jew and all arguments and differences faded away.”[[12: Chabad.org/3995717.]]
In Latvia, the Rebbe faced a new task: recreating the ethos and spirit of Lubavitch in a Western country where Jews had freedoms and rights. At the same time, he cared for the millions of Jews in Communist Russia.
Latvia was the bridge between Russia to the east and Germany and France to the west, straddling both worlds. It was in cosmopolitan Riga, then part of Imperial Russia, that Max Lilienthal, an adherent of the German Haskalah (secular Enlightenment) movement, established the first German-style Jewish secular school after arriving there in 1839.[[13: At the time, there were less than a thousand Jews in Riga. According to Ilja Lensky, director of the Jewish Museum in Riga, the community invited Lilienthal because they wanted a secular Jewish school. This may have been partially due to the Russian government pressuring for a less religious education system.]] From that beachhead, he attempted to transform Jewish education throughout Russia. By the time the Rebbe arrived, the influence of the Enlightenment in Riga was considerable. Most Jewish children attended secular-oriented Jewish schools, many of them using Yiddish for instruction. Some were students of the Derech Eretz School,[[14: For an overview of Jewish religious life in Riga at the time, see Abraham Godin, “Jewish Traditional and Religious Life in Latvian Communities,” available at: https://www.jewishgen.org/yizkor/latvia1/lat217.html.]] an Orthodox school that taught both religious and secular subjects, established by Rabbi Dubin.
Riga could not compare to the main centers of Jewish life in Poland and Lithuania. The Jewish European mecca was Warsaw, four hundred miles from Riga, home to 350,000 Jews. Warsaw boasted great Jewish scholars, a thriving Jewish culture, a vibrant chasidic life, Zionist activities, Yiddish and Hebrew theaters, and a variety of Jewish newspapers. According to a 1930 census, there were twenty yeshivas, five religious high schools, and 175 Jewish schools of divergent philosophies located there.[[15: Adam Dylewski, “Jewish Education in the Second Polish Republic, part 1,” https://sztetl.org.pl/en/tradycja-i-kultura-zydowska/historia-zydow-w-polsce/szkolnictwo-zydowskie-w-ii-rp-cz-1-warszawa.]] Not far from Warsaw resided the great chasidic courts of Belz, Gur, Novominsk, Radomsk, and others. Poland was also home to renowned yeshivas in cities like Lublin and Radom. It possessed towering spiritual leaders such as Rabbis Yisrael Meir Kagan (the Chafetz Chaim), Menachem Zemba, and Meir Shapiro. Nearby Lithuania had historically been a center of Jewish scholarship. Vilna boasted many prominent yeshivas, over one hundred synagogues, and one of the most influential rabbinic figures of the era, Rabbi Chaim Ozer Grodzinski.[[16: Rabbi Chaim Ozer Grodzinski (1863–1940) was the av beit din, chief rabbinical judge, of Vilnius. He led the umbrella organization Vaad HaYeshivos (Council of Yeshivas). He was a world-class scholar and universally respected as one of the greatest rabbinic leaders of his time.]]
While Riga had outstanding rabbis, the city had never hosted a Jewish leader of the Rebbe’s stature. His arrival caused a stir, and local Yiddish papers avidly reported on his activities, travels, pronouncements, and even health updates. But the Rebbe wasn’t just a local story. The Detroit Jewish Chronicle reported, “The Lubavitcher Rebbe had brought a great deal of activity into the life of Orthodox Jewry in Latvia. And Soviet Russia has thus, by expelling the Lubavitcher Rebbe, done a good turn to the Jews of Latvia.”[[17: “The Lubavitcher Rebbe,” February 10, 1928, available at: https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/djnews/djc.1928.02.10.001/4.]]
Latvia was not Russia, where Chabad had deep roots, and Riga was not the chasidic hub that the town of Lubavitch had been for over a century. There had been a modest Chabad community in Riga since 1878, enhanced by recent emigration from Russia; a few Chabad synagogues dotted the city.[[18: In the Jewish ghetto, there was a Chabad synagogue with three adjacent sanctuaries in the same structure, for Chasidim adhering to the varied Chabad groups of Lubavitch, Liadi, and Kopust.]] But there was no yeshivah to bring a youthful spirit to the city. It was a far cry from what Lubavitch had once been, with its outstanding yeshivah and vibrant community. Lubavitch was an oasis of sanctity, a place to set aside the difficulties of the austere realities of czarist Russia and experience spiritual renewal. Riga was geographically cut off from the Russian Chasidim, who could not cross the border. There were small chasidic clusters in Poland and Lithuania, but few could travel due to financial constraints and visa restrictions.
The Rebbe’s first home in Riga was a local hotel. The Grodner Moment, a Polish Yiddish newspaper, reported on the Rebbe’s efforts to reestablish the chasidic flavor of Lubavitch in Riga: “The Rebbe sits day and night in a room designated for prayer and learning.” His mornings were occupied by prayer, and in the afternoons he received visitors. “All types of Jews, traditional Jews, old-fashioned Jewish women, modern Jews – all come to the Rebbe. One for advice, another for business guidance, personal crisis, or communal affairs. One comes for a blessing, another for personal issues. The Rebbe deals with all of them and finds salvation for the plagued moods and depressed hearts.” Large crowds continually flocked to the hotel. “The corridors of the hotel are packed with masses of people. They wait there to have an audience with the Rebbe.”
On Shabbat, the paper reported, “the hotel loses its mundane weekday state.” On Shabbat afternoons, “people flood the hotel” to hear the Rebbe recite a maamar. “His voice becomes stronger and more flowing, words are streaming from his mouth, quotes from the Bible, Talmud, and Zohar woven and seasoned with parables, ideas, and interpretations.”[[19: Grodner Moment, January 10, 1928. This Yiddish daily newspaper was published in Grodno, Poland, between the World Wars.]]
“With the Rebbe’s arrival in Riga, a new era for Chabad Chasidism began. It roots were in Russia, and it had been displaced from its natural home with its tradition of a century and a half; it was transplanted in a new country,” writes chasidic scholar Rabbi Nachum Greenwald.[[20: HaRav, ed., Rabbi Nachum Greenwald (Machon HaRav, 2015), 125.]] “It was a major crisis for a chasidic community to be forcibly moved in brutal fashion to a foreign country.” A year after the Rebbe arrived in Riga, Anshel Zvogin, a Jew from Nevel, met with the Rebbe. “Why are you so despondent?” Zvogin asked. “When I came to visit you in Leningrad, you were joyful.” The Rebbe answered succinctly, “They drove me out.”[[21: Duchman, LeSheima Ozen, 291.]] Rabbi Yechezkel Feigin described the Rebbe’s situation in Riga.[[22: Letter from Feigin to Rabbi Eliyahu Simpson and Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson dated 17 Iyar, 5689 (May 28, 1929). Feigin explains that the historic sources of income for the Rebbe in Russia were nonexistent in Riga, and he urged them to set up a fundraising program in the US Chabad community.]] “Spiritually, the Rebbe is suffering. There are few anash here.” He portrayed the lack of chasidic milieu in Riga: “When the Rebbe says a maamar, there are not many who appreciate it. And he is troubled that he is unable to establish a yeshivah here due to a lack of resources.” The financial situation was distressing. “He is burdened by many debts, causing him much concern.” Chasidim in Communist Russia were unable to support the Rebbe as they had in the past. “You cannot imagine the situation in Russia. Most have lost their livelihood or have been imprisoned. Others are suffering from the lack of bread.”
The move to Riga had exacerbated Chabad’s financial crisis, and money was needed to support the Jews still living in Russia and to finance the underground network. Additional funds were also needed for the yeshivah in Poland, the struggling Chabad communities around the globe, the Rebbe’s activities, and his increasing need for medical care.
Since the time of Rabbi Schneur Zalman of Liadi (1745–1812), Chasidim had made regular voluntary contributions called maamad,[[23: The second Rebbe, Rabbi Dovber, known as the Mitteler Rebbe, and his disciple Reb Aharon Horowitz organized the annual collection known as maamad. In 1948, the Ramash wrote that this tradition followed the talmudic teachings of supporting a Torah scholar, making the Chasidim partners in the Rebbe’s work. “Giving maamad,” available at: chabad.org/2281850. Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson, who organized the maamad in the US at the time, provides a historical overview reaching back two centuries. See Zikhron Livnei Yisrael – Memoirs of Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson: 1907–1939 [Hebrew] (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1996), 160.]] literally, “upkeep,” to support the Rebbe’s court and activities. Traditionally, these were grassroots campaigns organized by the Chasidim themselves. But now the bulk of Chasidim living in Russia were undergoing severe economic disruption and they were geographically cut off from the Rebbe.[[24: Their philanthropy supported the establishment of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim and the communal work of the Rebbe Rashab. With the advent of the Russian revolution, much of that funding ended. Those major donors included Yeshaya Berlin, a lumber merchant who passed away in 1908, Menachem Monoson and Shmuel Trainin, who were both involved in the ice cream business in Russia, and Shmuel Gurary, who passed away shortly after the Rashab and is interred next to him in Rostov. Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, chap. 1.]] He had to rely on the thin flow of donations that trickled in from small groups of Chabad followers in Warsaw, other European cities, and the United States. In America there were more than eighty Chabad synagogues, but they weren’t a robust source of income for the Rebbe or the movement. The members of these synagogues were Russian immigrants with a limited financial capacity, navigating a new life in a foreign country.[[25: The earlier waves of immigrants were Jews who were somewhat traditional but not highly educated in Judaism. The synagogue of their hometown in Russia was Chabad, sometimes called Nusach Ari after the Chabad tradition in prayer. In America, these immigrants wanted to feel a sense of home, so they attended a synagogue like the one they had in Russia. Many congregants adapted to the US, slowly abandoning their observance. With the rise of Communism, there were more immigrants who were committed Chasidim, but still, their numbers were small, and few succeeded financially in the US. See Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael.]] Most of them lacked a personal connection to the Rebbe, as few had visited Lubavitch or studied in the yeshivah. They retained a sentimental connection to Chabad, with a tenuous link to chasidic tradition. Few participated in maamad. Rabbi Feigin urged Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson in New York to enlist supporters. “The situation is very bitter,” he wrote. “The Rebbe needs to visit doctors, and where are we to find the money for this?”[[26: Jacobson, Zikhron Livnei Yisrael, 161.]]
Most Chasidim were not aware of the extent of the problem. The seventh Rebbe explained years later, “The Rebbe’s household intentionally did not allow the financial challenges to be publicly known. Outwardly, they showed no indication of financial stress.”[[27: Torat Menachem 5717, 3:157–58.]]
The Rebbe was now operating in a new set of circumstances that posed a major challenge. The freedoms in Western countries like Latvia offered Jews choices that were unprecedented. Could they survive the influence and temptation of the outside world? Lubavitch had been a spiritual haven, sheltered from external influences. In Riga there was a diverse community, parts of which were antagonistic to traditional Judaism. Could chasidic life flourish in a Western liberal society?
This was the dilemma for Jews as countries slowly lifted the barriers that blocked them from integrating into modern society. In Europe during the interwar years, religious observance dwindled with the lure of political freedoms and contemporary ideas. Major demographic changes uprooted the historic Jewish communal structure. After the First World War, “there was a shift to urbanization,” says Jewish historian Yehuda Geberer. With an increasing population living in large cities instead of small towns, there was exposure to broader society that lured many away from the classic religious lifestyle. All chasidic groups, not just Chabad, faced what Geberer calls “the great crisis.” He explains, “After 150 years of a rising population of Chasidim, the numbers began to drop in the interwar years.”
To shield themselves from the spiritual perils of the modern world, some religious Jews moved inward, erecting barriers and disassociating from the outside world – in a sense, creating their own society within the broader society. Others chose to integrate into the wider culture while retaining a sense of Jewish identity, still following a modicum of tradition. Some chose the path of complete assimilation, abandoning Jewish observance altogether. Others became adherents, and even leaders, of the variety of new political philosophies that had become popular.
The most successful antidote to all this was an intensive focus on advanced Jewish education. Geberer says Chabad took the lead in this arena, opening the original chasidic yeshivah. “The first who did this was the Rebbe Rashab with the opening of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim in 1897.” It was a revolutionary move, and with time, other chasidic groups followed Chabad’s lead, establishing their own yeshivas to bolster their youth.[[28: Yehuda Geberer, “Crisis Management: The Great Crisis of the Chassidic Movement,” available at: https://tachlismedia.com/podcast/crisis-management-the-great-crisis-of-the-chassidic-movement/.]] After relocating to Riga, the Rebbe expanded this considerably with the development of a network of yeshivas in Poland and Lithuania.
While most Orthodox groups took a defensive position, concerned with the preservation of the observant core and ignoring the outside, the Rebbe courageously went on the offensive, taking a broader, more inclusive stance, the potential dangers notwithstanding. His philosophy delicately navigated between the extremes of insularity and integration. His approach was one of “principled engagement,” sharing in the bounty of the freedoms of Western society but staunchly retaining the values of Judaism as the cornerstone of life. Riga was where this unique vision and strategy for Jewish continuity, which would later keep chasidic life thriving in America, began to emerge.
What never changed, however, was the Rebbe’s dedication to the Jews remaining in Russia. Even though he had left the Soviet Union, his influence still permeated the Jewish communities there, and the Russian Communist government remained strongly opposed to the Rebbe’s efforts.
A year after the Rebbe left Russia, Anatoly Lunacharsky,[[29: Anatoly Lunacharsky (1875–1933) was a Marxist revolutionary who was appointed as the first education minister of the Soviet Union in 1917 and served in that position until 1929. Afterward he was the delegate to the League of Nations and then appointed ambassador to Spain.]] the Soviet minister of education, took direct aim at him in The New York Times.[[30: The New York Times, October 21, 1928.]] “We shall combat the relics of the Middle Ages, the Schneersohnovschina.”[[31: Schneersohnovschina (“Schneersohnists”) refers to followers of the Rebbe. During Communists times it was common for Russian authorities to accuse Chasidim who were arrested of being Schneersohnists. This accusation was cause for imprisonment.]] The Times explained the term as “the religious activities of the Lubavitcher Rebbe, who is now in exile in Latvia.” According to Lunacharsky, Jewish religious life would not be tolerated. “The solution to the Jewish problem in Russia lies in the fusion of the Jews in the great melting pot of the peoples who inhabit the Soviet Union.”
From his exile in Latvia, the Rebbe was determined to maintain the underground Jewish network in Russia. From the moment he reached Riga, he began to reach back to the Jews in Russia and assist them through a variety of channels. His first tool was his pen. The Rebbe wrote frequently and prolifically to the Jews of Russia, inspiring the Chasidim and providing guidance to the activists, urging them to continue the struggle for Jewish values and traditions. His correspondence during that period reveals his broad involvement in activities that took place in all parts of Russia. Shalom Ber Levin writes that “within the first month, the Rebbe dispatched seventy letters to Russia, the majority to Chabad leaders to empower and encourage them.”[[32: Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia (History of Chabad in Poland, Lithuania, and Latvia) (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2011), chap. 11.]] Immediately after his arrival in Riga, he wrote to his followers in Russia urging them to prevent the Russian Jewish conference, organized by the Leningrad Jewish community and surreptitiously supported by the Yevesektzia. “Anyone with a G-d-fearing spirit should protest against the Leningrad conference and undermine those plotting against the values of Torah.”[[33: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter to Rabbi Shlomo Yosef Zevin dated 4 Cheshvan, 5688 (October 30, 1927).]] Despite all the suffering he endured for his efforts to oppose it, including his arrest and exile, he dispatched a detailed action plan to disrupt the conference.[[34: The plan focused on nine key cities, including Moscow, Leningrad, and even remote Kutaisi in Soviet Georgia, with lists of contacts and instructions to the Chasidim in Russia on how to undermine the convention. See the chart of each city with detailed instructions. Igrot Kodesh 1:100, letter dated Cheshvan, 5688 (October 1927) (only the month is given).]] Those plans were successful, and the conference was never convened.
Despite being in Riga, the Rebbe was intimately involved in activities throughout Russia. To Rabbi Simon Yakovshvili, the Rebbe wrote, “You should travel to your hometown [Kutaisi, Soviet Georgia] and study the art of shechitah. As for seeking a shidduch (a match), you should defer it for a while.” He instructed him to consult with Chasidim who were already there, “Avraham Levik [Slavin] and Schneur Zalman [Altshuler]” about projects in Jewish education. The Rebbe wanted details of efforts in all cities in the region. “Report to me all the time all that you have accomplished,” he wrote.[[35: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 16, letter dated 8 Cheshvan, 5688 (November 3, 1927).]] In another letter, the Rebbe lauded the Chasid Shimon Bliner in Moscow. “I enjoyed reading that you established classes in Mishnah and chasidic philosophy. I read the names of those involved; please share with them my blessing.”[[36: Igrot Kodesh 16:113, letter dated 11 Cheshvan, 5688 (November 13, 1927).]] He sent similar letters to other Jewish communities and leaders across Russia, written in poetic rabbinic lexicon, overflowing with blessings, deep emotion, and affection.
These communications carried a risk for the recipients. In 1930, The Detroit Jewish Chronicle reported that sixteen Jewish leaders were arrested in Minsk for the counterrevolutionary crime of corresponding with the Rebbe. “They had been hounded by the secret police for no other reason,” stated the paper, “other than being in contact with the Lubavitcher Rebbe.”[[37: The Detroit Jewish Chronicle, April 23, 1930, available at: https://digital.bentley.umich.edu/djnews/djc.1930.04.25.001/3.]]
Two weeks after arriving in Riga, the Rebbe convened a meeting of prominent rabbis to create Vaad Magen UMekhaseh, the Committee for the Protection and Care (of Russian Jewry).[[38: Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 24. The first meeting was held November 15, 1927 (20 Marcheshvan, 5688); see Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit for a protocol of the meeting that includes a comprehensive plan to seek the support of major Jewish groups such as the JDC, the Alliance Israélite Universelle in France, and other countries.]] The first meeting included prominent leaders such as Rabbi Yosef Rosen (the Rogotchover Gaon),[[39: Rabbi Yosef Rosen (1858–1936) was known as the Rogotchover after his birthplace; his family was part of the Kopust branch of Chabad. Rabbi Rozin was the rabbi of Dvinsk and one of the most prominent talmudic scholars of the twentieth century. He was particularly known for his photographic memory.]] Berlin’s chief rabbi, Dr. Meir Hildesheimer, and Rabbi Mendel Zak.[[40: Rabbi Mendel Zak (1873–1941) was the chief rabbi of Riga who established a yeshivah there in 1921. He studied in the yeshivas of Brisk and Volozhin. He and his family were killed in the Holocaust.]] Their efforts to help Russian Jews gained the support of renowned European rabbis, including Rabbis Yisrael Meir Kagan and Chaim Ozer Grodzinski.
The organization declared special worldwide communal fasts to plead for heavenly intervention regarding the oppression of the Russian Jews; it also included special prayers for their welfare in the Yom Kippur services the following year. In the coming months, the Rebbe dispatched the Rashag to London, Paris, and Berlin to meet with local chief rabbis and top Jewish officials to request assistance for Russian Jewry. In the summer of 1928, following that visit, the Rebbe sent a poignant letter[[41: In the letter the Rebbe thanks Rabbi Hertz for the “warm welcome given to my son-in-law, Rabbi Gurary.” He goes on to implore Rabbi Hertz to help Russian Jewry. Igrot Kodesh 16:200, letter dated 21 Tamuz, 5688 (July 9, 1928).]] to England’s chief rabbi, Dr. Yosef Hertz.[[42: Rabbi Dr. Yosef Hertz (1872–1946) was the chief rabbi of Britain from 1913 until his passing.]] “It is not a time for silence or to hold back on action. We must save Russian Jewry. What will future generations say if we do not answer their call in the time of crisis? I know of twenty thousand children in the USSR who wish to study Torah and are unable to – not because of the persecution, but rather the lack of money.” The Rebbe urged Hertz to exert his influence on those in England who could help provide funds.
From one perspective, being in Riga enabled the Rebbe to intensify his efforts. As he wrote to Jewish activist Professor Waldemar Haffkine,[[43: Waldemar Haffkine (1860–1930), born in Odessa, was a noted scientist who created vaccines for cholera and the bubonic plague. He was a strong advocate for Jewish causes and became observant in the latter part of his life.]] “I have not given up on Russia. My residence is just outside the border so I can continue my efforts for Russian Jewry.” The Rebbe could now broaden his reach, whereas “due to peculiar circumstances in Russia, it was impossible to correspond with the friends of our work outside the country.” From Riga, the Rebbe said, he could be “more unbound and freer in my work on behalf of Russian Jewry.”[[44: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter in German to Haffkine from Riga, dated December 24, 1927. Mindel Archives.]] The Rebbe had more ambitious ideas, attempting to enlist Haffkine’s help in arranging a private meeting of Jewish leaders for the purpose of strategizing how to mitigate the “greatest danger and damage to the activities of Russian Jewry: the Yevesektzia. We have to find a solution to extinguish the power of the Yevesektzia.” The Rebbe emphasized that “this must be done with the utmost secrecy.”[[45: It seems that the suggestion of creating a private meeting of prominent Jews did not prove successful. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 2, letter in German to Haffkine from Riga, dated January 19, 1928. Mindel Archives.]]
The Rebbe continued his efforts to secure support for Russian Jewry from America’s primary Jewish charitable fund to assist world Jewry, the Joint Distribution Committee (JDC). While still in Russia, he had met with local JDC representatives and visiting leaders from the US. Now based in Riga, he met with representatives of the JDC in Europe, traveling to Berlin shortly after his arrival from Russia. The JDC supported the Rebbe’s work for a period while he was in Russia and in Riga, but then it began to reduce its funding. Instead it supported the Russian government’s plan to relocate Jews to communal agriculture settlements.[[46: Before they ended their support in 1938, the JDC invested sixteen million dollars ($238 million today) in helping the Communists forcibly move Jews to agricultural settlements.]]
“The revolution not only shattered traditional Jewish religious and cultural life, but it shattered the old economic and social roles,” says Nora Levin.[[47: Nora Levin, The Jews in the Soviet Union Since 1917 (New York University Press, 1988), chap. 6.]] In that economy, Jews had been “petty tradesman and artisans, exchanging goods with peasants in hundreds of market towns.” The plan to settle Jews in agricultural colonies was supposed to change the economic status of Jews in Russia. Semyon Dimenstein, leader of the Yevesektzia, advocated this in conferences held as early as 1918. The land resettlement project was launched in 1924 to “productize Jews,” as Levin puts it, “and turn them into farmers.” Authorities relocated Jewish families, sometimes forcibly, to farms in Ukraine and Crimea, in the hope that doing so would provide the Jews with a proper livelihood. This was part of the Communist plan to shift from private farming to communal farms.[[48: Originally, much of the land had been owned by the peasants following the emancipation of the Russian serfs in 1861. The new policy forced the creation of collectives to farm, which meant a loss of personal incentive. Productivity dropped; this was one of the causes of the famine in the Soviet Union.]]
The JDC’s intensions were noble, argues Professor Jonathan Sarna. “They wanted to help the Jews of Russia.”[[49: Author’s interview with Jonathan Sarna.]] The Communists ended the czarist policy of government-sponsored anti-Semitism. They abolished the Pale Settlement, permitting Jews to live anywhere. In the new Soviet Russia, Jews were equal citizens, prompting many American Jews to feel optimistic about a new era for Russian Jewry.
The Rebbe felt that this strategy was deeply flawed, as the farms lacked the basic infrastructure for Jewish life.[[50: Despite his reservations, in 1925 the Rebbe did write a letter with a qualified endorsement of the agricultural communities. “It was gratifying to hear from Dr. Rosen about the establishment of the agricultural colonies.” However, the Rebbe raised concerns about the “lack of attention to religious institutions, mikveh, teachers, shochtim, rabbis, synagogues – none of these are a component of the program of the establishment of the colonies.” He added, “Your support in establishing the colonies is to be lauded. However, what about the thousands who cannot work in agriculture, or move from their homes, and struggle to make a living?” He encouraged the JDC to help them. The letter was addressed to the leaders of the JDC in New York, translated into English, and read at the JDC board meeting. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter dated 25 Sivan, 5685 (June 25, 1925).]] There were no synagogues, schools, or other Jewish institutions. The Rebbe feared that this was yet another insidious step in the Russian government’s effort to sever Jews from their tradition. While still in Russia, the Rebbe urged US rabbis to lobby the JDC to at least “provide the agricultural colonies with the religious institutions necessary for every Jew.”[[51: Letter to the Agudas Harabonim (the New York-based Union of Orthodox Rabbis) dated 10 Cheshvan, 5686 (October 28, 1925).]] While not criticizing the JDC publicly, the Rebbe believed that it would be far more beneficial for Jews to remain in the cities near family and community. He asked the JDC to provide Russian Jews with the tools, training, and financial support necessary to establish home-based factories and small businesses. That would give them greater economic freedom and allow them the option of not working on Shabbat. The Rebbe argued that “home-based industries would provide the Jews with a respectable income and sense of dignity.”[[52: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 16, letter to the Board of the JDC dated 10 Cheshvan, 5686 (November 10, 1925).]]
The Soviet government’s intent was more insidious. “They are interested in the colonization in order to realize their evil plans to break down and destroy the Jewish spirit, to realize their old, rooted hatred toward Judaism,” an anonymous writer[[53: While the writer is anonymous, he seems to have been involved with JDC activities in Russia.]] said in a scathing public letter[[54: The disturbing twelve-page public letter addressed to Dr. Rosen, the head of the JDC in Moscow, is a heartbreaking description of the condition of Russian Jewry. The letter criticized the JDC policy that supported the resettlement of Jews to farms in Ukraine. The financial support of the JDC facilitated the goals of the Yevesektzia to destroy religious observance. The letter claims the policy was not even helping the families economically; it documents hunger, a lack of clothing, and harsh winters. It describes the show put on for foreign visitors: Farmers would claim that all was well when in truth they were suffering from hunger, cold, and religious oppression. The reference to foreign visitors apparently meant JDC officials such as Felix Warburg, who visited the farms in Russia. The letter was translated into English by JDC staff in New York and forwarded to Dr. Cyrus Adler and Louis Marshall. JDC Archives, folder no. 425.]] titled “The New Book of Lamentations.” Published in 1928 in Hadoar,[[55: Hadoar, March 23, 1928. Hadoar (Hebrew for “The Post”) was a Hebrew-language periodical published from 1921 to 2005 in the United States by the Histadruth Ivrith of America. Hadoar was described by the Jewish Telegraphic Agency as “one of the best Hebrew-language magazines in the world” in its day.]] a prominent US Hebrew-language newspaper, the letter described the bleak situation in the agricultural colonies and the Yevesektzia’s motives for relocating Jews to the settlements. “Our benefactors from America and Europe who think that the salvation for the Jewish people will come from Crimea, Siberia, and Amur are mistaken.” It’s a failed policy, he wrote. “We plow and plant with tears and harvest with despair. When autumn comes, we and our children have to seek bread.”
In 1929, in the new collective settlements in the Borisov region, Jews who refused to milk cows on Shabbat were expelled as “undesirables.”[[56: Levin, The Jews in the Soviet Union Since 1917, vol. 1, chap. 10.]] One American visitor described how the synagogue of the communal farm town of Krivoy Rog was converted to a hall for the arts: “The raised platform – on which once reposed the Ark of the Covenant, the Torah, and the pulpit – is now bare.” The synagogues that once resounded with “holy prayer” were now full of old Yiddish ballads that “mocked traditional pieties.”[[57: Ibid.]]
The JDC had curtailed its funding to the Rebbe’s underground educational system because it could put them at odds with the Communist regime. Now in Riga, the Rebbe would be able to meet JDC leaders more easily and restore critical funding for Russian Jewry. Some in the JDC dissented with the decision to cut funding for the Rebbe’s work. Its Berlin representative, Dr. Bernard Kahn, asked the JDC headquarters in New York in 1928 to continue providing assistance for religious activities, noting that the Rebbe’s network continued to operate despite the oppression of the Communists and adding that he was “the only one who gets all the information from a network of people.”[[58: As Dovid Margolin explains, this letter was part of an unsuccessful effort to persuade the JDC leadership in New York to support the Rebbe’s religious underground in Russia. It is difficult to speculate regarding the past, but one has to the wonder if the more secular leadership of the JDC did not have a proper appreciation for the primary role of Jewish learning and religious life. They also seemed swept up by the agenda of the Soviets, spurred on by the Yevesektzia, that promised economic independence in the communal farms. Some JDC leaders began to question if they were being duped by the Russians, as Cyrus Adler wrote in 1932, “These people are trying to defraud us of 6,600,000 rubles ($169,950,000 today).” JDC Archives, folder no. 475.]]
The Rebbe’s pleas to JDC leaders in meetings in Berlin were unsuccessful. “Is it possible that our brothers in America will see the pain in the souls and bodies of their brothers?” the Rebbe wrote in January 1929[[59: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 16, letter dated 19 Shevat, 5689 (January 30, 1929).]] to JDC board member Rabbi Aron Teitelbaum of Agudas Harabonim in New York.[[60: When the JDC was created in 1918, it united diverse groups to provide Jewish assistance. Teitelbaum represented the Orthodox Central Relief Committee. He was also a member of Agudas Harabonim, the Union of Orthodox Rabbis established in 1901. Its members were mostly European-born rabbis, many of them notable Torah scholars. At the time, Agudas Harabonim was influential in the US.]] The Rebbe painted a dire picture of Jewish life in Russia. “The institutions in Russia are hanging between life and death. There are daily requests for funding.” The Rebbe was taking loans to keep things afloat in Russia, for “the schools are on the verge of closing.” The decision to deny funding would bring victory to the Yevesektzia and “demoralize the activists in Russia.”
By late 1928, massive food shortages were impacting the Soviet Union. Stalin’s plan to create state-run collectives had disrupted the food supply to Russia.[[61: Production dropped significantly under the forced plan of communal farms. Richard Pipes, Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime (Vintage Books, 1995), 370–72.]] Rationing was instituted in Leningrad, Moscow, and other cities. In early 1929, the Rebbe began to raise the alarm on the likelihood of a matzah shortage before Passover. He had been receiving messages from activists in Russia begging for help procuring matzah. Though the Yevesektzia had successfully dismantled many Jewish institutions, most Jews in Russia still followed basic traditions, including eating matzah and abstaining from chametz (leavened products such as bread) on Passover.[[62: Dovid Margolin, “The Soviet Jews Who Risked Persecution for the Sake of Matzah,” Mosaic, April 28, 2016, available at: https://mosaicmagazine.com/observation/religion-holidays/2016/04/the-soviet-jews-who-risked-persecution-for-the-sake-of-matzah/.]] Without flour, not only would they not be able to observe the central mitzvah of Passover, but many would starve from lack of food. The Rebbe knew that hundreds of thousands of people, already suffering from starvation, would put their lives at risk rather than eat bread on Passover. “You will not find even ten percent of Jews who will eat chametz on Passover,” he wrote.
The Rebbe organized an emergency committee in Riga and reached out to other prominent religious leaders, including Rabbis Chaim Ozer of Vilnius, Yisrael Meir Kagan of Radin, and Yosef Chaim Sonnenfeld of Jerusalem.[[63: Many others also backed the Rebbe, including Rabbi Dr. Meir Hildesheimer in Berlin, Rabbi Yechezkel Lifshitz of Kalish, Rabbi Avraham Dovber Kahane Shapiro of Kovno, and Rabbi Menachem Zak of Latvia. The chief rabbis of England, France, Holland, and Belgium joined the effort as well. Igrot Kodesh 16:16.]] They all issued public statements calling on Jews the world over to support the Rebbe’s emergency campaign. These rabbis were the Rebbe’s natural allies, but would major Jewish groups like the JDC in New York and the Alliance Israélite Universelle in Paris support the emergency campaign? And how would the Russians react to shipments of matzah from abroad that could embarrass them by highlighting the famine? Without the government’s approval, shipping matzah would be next to impossible.
JDC leader Dr. Cyrus Adler[[64: JDC Archives, folder no. 478, letter from Cyrus Adler to Joseph Hyman dated January 28, 1929.]] argued against supporting the Rebbe’s campaign,[[65: Dovid Margolin, “The 1929 Struggle to Send Matzah into the Soviet Union,” available at: chabad.org/4353455.]] saying, “The Yevesektzia might block the deliveries. It also might embarrass the Russians; they might not even agree to allow the shipments.”[[66: It took a while, but eventually there was an undercurrent of regret in the JDC. Cyrus Adler, who had argued against funding the matzah shipment, later became more supportive of the Rebbe’s approach. In a letter written in 1932 to Dr. Hyman, head of the JDC in New York, Adler wrote, “I feel this is up to me to do something to help the Jews in Russia have matzah for Passover. I am not disposed to take the attitude to completely surrender all Jewish religious practice in Russia to the Soviets, whether they be Jewish Soviets or other Soviets.” JDC Archives, letter dated February 2, 1932.]]
The Rebbe forged ahead, overcoming the multiple challenges of raising funds and securing the Russian government’s permission, as well as the logistics of producing matzah. He launched a diplomatic initiative in Latvia, enlisting the help of Mordechai Dubin, who met with the Russian Ambassador in Riga. He promised to do all he could to help the shipment go through. The Rashag assisted Dubin, meeting with the Russian trade minister, and was in daily contact with the Russian Embassy for updates.[[67: Letter from the Rashag to Rabbi Yisrael Meisel dated April 16, 1929. Meisel had been a rabbi in Kiev before immigrating to Tel Aviv, and he had a longstanding connection with Chabad Rebbes. The Rashag’s correspondence goes into great detail about the campaign. Meisel may have assisted with fundraising in Eretz Yisrael; perhaps that is why he received a such comprehensive report from the Rashag. The letter was discovered in the National Library of Israel by chasidic researcher Rabbi Zalman Berger. National Library of Israel, Jerusalem, file ARC 4-1827.]] The Rebbe’s son-in-law Rabbi Gurary also traveled to Berlin, where Rabbi Dr. Hildesheimer led a delegation (which included Leo Baeck, the leading Reform rabbi, and other influential community leaders) to a meeting with the Soviet Ambassador in Germany. The kehillah (official Jewish community) in Berlin allocated five thousand German marks for the emergency campaign.
At the same time, the Rebbe launched an international fundraising campaign. Dubin and Gurary were dispatched to London[[68: In the Rashag’s letter to Rabbi Yisrael Meisel, he writes that Chief Rabbi Hertz made a major public announcement and was extremely helpful. In Paris, he writes, there was a concentration of Russian immigrants who made large donations. France’s Chief Rabbi Levi was also supportive.]] and Paris to raise funds and meet with the chief rabbis and other Jewish leaders. Local committees were started in most European countries, including Holland, Poland, Switzerland, and Belgium. Even smaller communities became involved, including Shanghai and Harbin, China. The Rebbe enlisted key rabbinic figures in Eretz Yisrael, Rabbi Yosef Chaim Sonnenfeld[[69: Rabbi Sonnenfeld was the head of the Charedi community in Eretz Yisrael, and Rabbis Kook and Meir were chief rabbis appointed by the Zionist movement. While they respected each other, they stood apart on many issues. The fact that leaders from varied sectors of the community made a public request for the campaign reflects the broad endorsement that the Rebbe received.]] and Chief Rabbis Avraham Yitzchak Kook and Yaakov Meir, who issued public statements calling for aid.
Press reports swirled on both sides of the Atlantic with news on the status of the shipments. First the Russians approved it; then they rescinded the authorization. Gurary lamented the byzantine Russian government in a letter to Rabbi Yisroel Meisels in Tel Aviv. “You have no idea how difficult it is to deal with Russian officials. Every day they say they have no answer. Then they say I must inquire in Moscow. Then they say they have not heard back. Then they tell us the authorization must come from Riga, and then from Berlin. It’s impossible to get a clear response.”[[70: Ibid Letter Rashag to Meisel.]]
Finally, five weeks before Passover, the Soviet Trade representative in Riga gave Dubin the green light for the shipment with the “modest duty of five kopecks per kilo.”[[71: A kopeck is equal to one cent; there are one hundred kopecks in a ruble. It would amount to less than a dollar per kilo in today’s currency.]] Five wagonloads of matzah were immediately dispatched by train. But then came another twist: desperate for foreign currency, the Russians changed the duty price and demanded an exorbitant two rubles (valued at sixty dollars today) per kilo, for a total of $130,000 for the shipment (valued at some two million dollars today). The diplomatic haggling continued until the Russians finally dropped the duty by seventy-five percent, to fifty kopeks.
Production began full force in Riga, Dvinsk, and Berlin.[[72: The Manischewitz company was willing to ship matzah from the US. For a while, this idea was considered, but because of the delay in receiving permission to ship the matzah, it was ultimately untenable. Margolin, “The 1929 Struggle to Send Matzah into the Soviet Union.”]] In the end, 140,000 kilos were shipped for distribution[[73: Ibid Margolin.]] and another 5,689 packages of matzah were mailed directly to families in four hundred communities. The campaign cost a total of $88,000, some $1.3 million today. The JDC did participate with an allocation of ten thousand dollars, thanks to the urging of Dr. Rosen, the head of the JDC office in Moscow. Due to the Rebbe’s efforts, the Jews of Russia survived another Passover under Soviet oppression.
With that, the Rebbe achieved another significant milestone. He proved that his influence went beyond the borders of Russia, that he could marshal global support for his advocacy for Jewish affairs with or without the endorsement of the Jewish establishment. In a totally new environment, he successfully launched an international campaign. In the years to come, Chabad took a leadership role in global Jewish affairs, and the Rebbe acted decisively when it came to helping Jews or bolstering religious life. When Chabad shared goals with other major Jewish organizations, it cooperated with them, but it did not fear acting unilaterally. This streak of independence animated many of the Rebbe’s initiatives in the future.
In 1921, while still in Rostov, the Rebbe received news of the opening of a yeshivah in Warsaw. He referred to this time as “days of light and days of joy.”[[74: Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, 84–85.]] At the time, the yeshivah in Rostov was being forcibly closed, and the Chabad educational network in Russia was going underground. The Warsaw branch was established with twelve students on the first anniversary of the passing of the Rebbe Rashab. A few days later, the Rebbe dispatched a detailed letter to its administration outlining a plan for its organizational structure and educational goals.[[75: The Rebbe established a board of five members to oversee the yeshivah. He appointed three of its members, Rabbis Shraga Zalmanov, Dov Moshe Shmotkin, and Schneur Zalman Shmotkin, and told them to select another two members. They had all studied in the yeshivah in Lubavitch and understood the unique approach of Tomchei Temimim.]] He instructed them to “focus on discussions of ethical behavior, instilling a G-d-fearing spirit, and acquiring good character traits.” Clearly, he wanted the new yeshivah to follow the model in Lubavitch that had concentrated not only on the acquisition of talmudic knowledge but on developing the character and spiritual qualities of its students. With time, the Warsaw yeshivah expanded significantly, acquiring a large building and eventually relocating to the suburb of Otwock. It became the primary incubator for a new generation of Chasidim and Jewish communal leaders.[[76: Some of the students survived the Holocaust, and some found refuge in remote Shanghai, China. These made up an important portion of the new generation of Chabad rabbis in communities across the world in the postwar era. See chap. 10 of this book.]] By 1927, the yeshivah had grown to 157 students. The next year, the number increased to 250.
Four months after departing Russia, the Rebbe visited the yeshivah when he traveled to Warsaw[[77: See Levin, Toldot Chabad BeRusia HaSovietit, chap. 15, for a detailed description of the Warsaw visit.]] for two weeks.[[78: The Warsaw community wrote to the Rebbe after he arrived in Riga from Russia, inviting him to relocate there. He responded to them shortly afterward, saying, “Their request could not be fulfilled for various reasons.” While there are no reasons stated in the letter, it might have been because of difficulties procuring visas or citizenship. The Rebbe added that he hoped to have the opportunity to see them soon in their country. See Igrot Kodesh, vol. 1, letter dated 2 Cheshvan, 5688 (October 28, 1927).]] He met with the city’s leading rabbis and communal leaders, deepening their awareness of the plight of Russian Jewry. He also spent time conducting yechidut with many of the Chasidim. The highlight was a long Purim farbrengen with the students that began at 3:30 p.m. and did not end until 2:00 a.m.
Warsaw was not the only city the Rebbe visited during this period. Among other cities in the region, the Rebbe traveled to Vilnius three times, where he was greeted by crowds of thousands at the train station. On his first trip in 1928, which lasted one week, he met with Rabbi Chaim Ozer Grodzinski to discuss Russian Jewry. The Rebbe also visited Rokiškis, Lithuania; Ludmir, Poland; and Glubok (twice).[[79: For a detailed description of the Rebbe’s travels during his interlude in Riga, see Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, chap. 9.]]
For the High Holidays in 1930, Chasidim from Poland and Lithuania came to celebrate with the Rebbe. A group of twenty-one Chasidim convened in the home of the Rashag, who suggested establishing Agudas Chassidei Chabad (a Union of the Chabad Chasidim) in Poland, Lithuania, and Latvia. With the Rebbe’s approval, the organization took on the mandate of strengthening the Chabad community in the region.
From Riga, the Rebbe continued to connect with Chabad Chasidim and Jewish activists around the world. He wrote regularly to Chasidim across the globe, focusing on strengthening the great center of Jewish population in Poland. In the 1930s, he dispatched emissaries to fortify Jewish life in communities as far as Australia and South Africa.
The Rebbe remained deeply involved with the Riga Jewish community. Simchat Torah of 1930 was the culmination of the holiday season for the Chasidim of Riga and those who had come from nearby countries. The Rebbe had just returned a few weeks earlier from his almost yearlong journey to Eretz Yisrael and America.[[80: See chap. 7 of this book.]] On that joyous evening, the Rebbe expressed his angst over the spiritual situation in Latvia.[[81: Sefer HaSichos, 5688–91 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot, 2002), 151–69. This talk was given after the Rebbe’s return from his visit to the US.]] He explained that while Latvia had a Jewish population similar in size to that of Lithuania, it lacked the vibrancy of Jewish scholarship that existed in the adjacent country. “In Lithuania there are many large yeshivas,” the Rebbe said. “In every town, there is a yeshivah ketanah (high school) and several chadarim. They study like they used to study.” The Lithuanian community possessed an ethos of learning, while Latvia had a “culture of supporting Torah financially.” They were philanthropic, with local Jews underwriting Torah study – even in other countries – but the level of actual scholarship in Latvia was weak. The Rebbe explained that this was due to the political restrictions on Latvia during the years of Russian rule, which made establishing yeshivas difficult. But that ended in 1918 with Latvian independence. “Since then, an effort should have been made to establish Torah institutions.” By 1930, Latvia was dominated by secular Jewish schools; the Rebbe called the country “Jewish only in appearance.” The Rebbe turned to the leaders of Tze’irei Agudath Israel,[[82: The young adult division of Agudath Israel.]] charging them with the mission of bolstering Jewish education in Latvia. “You have established schools according to the ideology of Torah im derekh eretz, integrating secular and religious study.”[[83: The ideology of Torah with derekh eretz was advocated by Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch (1808–88) of Germany, who believed that Jews should play a larger role in their host culture while fully following traditional Judaism. Many rabbinic scholars, primarily from Eastern Europe, opposed this integration into broader society.]] He was generally critical of this system, explaining that his first choice of a model for Jewish education was the traditional cheder, “taught by an old-world melamed (teacher).” But understanding the challenges in Riga, the Rebbe took a practical approach. He encouraged the community to stand behind Tze’irei Agudath Israel. “You should be given every kind of help and support.”[[84: In a 1931 talk to young Jewish leaders during a visit to Rokiškis, Lithuania, the Rebbe lamented that the standards of Jewish scholarship had been lowered. It used to be, he said, that “Jews were dedicated to scholarship and knew that the study of Torah was primary.” He expressed reservations about the modern schools that integrated secular and religious studies. “It saddens the heart to envisage what kind of people are going to grow up out of the children who are now attending the modern chadarim. Not only is today’s modern education not capable of providing us with devout Jews (and obviously not Torah sages), but in addition, it is withering the spiritual potential of its pupils, leaving them barely equal to their age-mates.” He praised the “old-style cheder with teachers imbued with spiritual Jewish refinement” who would be role models to children and the “yeshivas filled with the voices of Torah and imbued with yirat Shamayim (G-d-fearing spirit).” The Rebbe also criticized the new approach of “Ivrit BeIvrit,” using modern Hebrew as the language of instruction, saying, “The approach lacks awe of Heaven and is very weak.” The Rebbe well understood that government regulations mandated a program of secular studies and that these schools were a response to that requirement. “After all, what could be done? When there is compulsory schooling, there have to be secular curriculums.” He also drew a contrast to the secular Yiddish schools. “Of course, these schools are better than those Yiddish schools which unfortunately bear the epithet ‘Jewish,’” he said, referring to the schools set up by the secular Yiddish movement. Sefer HaSichos, 5688–91 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2002), reshimah 2, 192.]]
The Rebbe then turned to a group headed by Rabbi Mordechai Dubin and tasked them with leading the initiative. He told them that they must become involved in strengthening Jewish education and galvanize the financial resources needed. The Rebbe’s intent was clear: He expected Dubin to transform the Jewish school system in Riga, controlled at the time by secular elements. “I am giving you this mission,” he said, noting the presence of witnesses to the assignment.[[85: Likkutei Dibburim, vol. 5, chap. 39, Simchat Torah 5691; Sefer HaSichos, 5688–91.]] It was clear from the emotional talk that the Rebbe was disheartened by the state of Jewish life in Latvia. Yes, Latvians could support great centers of Jewish learning in nearby countries and even send their children there, but the Rebbe demanded a fundamental change locally.
It would take some time for Dubin to fulfill the task entrusted to him. He had already laid the foundation for educational change in Riga in 1920, when he established the Derech Eretz School that taught Jewish and secular studies. The opportunity to fulfill the Rebbe’s mission came in 1934, when Dubin’s political influence increased. It was after the Ulmanis coup, when Prime Minister Kārlis Ulmanis disbanded all political parties and the democratically elected parliament. All the Jewish parties were deemed illegal, but because of Dubin’s personal bond with Ulmanis, Agudath Israel was allowed to function. Dubin orchestrated the appointment of Rabbi Chaim Mordechai Aizek Hodakov, who had been the founding dean of the Derech Eretz School when he was just eighteen years old, as chief inspector of the Jewish schools. Until then, most schools had been secular. Many were controlled by the Yiddishists, who aimed to replace traditional religious values with a Jewish identity based on Yiddish language and culture. The Yiddish movement had begun in Russia in the late nineteenth century and spread abroad.[[86: The Yiddish movement believed that using Yiddish would be a barrier to assimilation. It was a secular philosophy that rejected classic Jewish beliefs and religious observance. At the Czernowitz Conference in September of 1908, the leaders declared Yiddish to be the “glue to hold Jewish life together.” In the early years of the movement, some of its schools followed a strong anti-Zionist approach, but with time, almost all became supportive of Zionism. Yiddish schools were established in Russia and other countries in Europe, and with Jewish immigration to the US and Canada, the same happened in those locations. Yiddish schools were frequently called “Peretz Schools” in memory of Yiddish writer I.L. Peretz. By the early 1970s, most of them had closed. Today there is one full-time Yiddish day school in the world, located in Melbourne, Australia. Founded in 1935 as I.L. Peretz Sunday School, today it is called Sholem Aleichem School and has some three hundred students. It describes its educational philosophy as “fostering awareness of all aspects of Jewish life with a particular emphasis on the promotion of Yiddish language and literature, Hebrew and Jewish culture, veltkhe yiddishkayt – a secular approach to Jewish history, traditions and customs, ethics and values.” For a history of the Yiddish movement, see David Fishman, The Rise of Modern Yiddish Culture (University of Pittsburgh Press, 2005).]] Hodakov instituted major reforms, tilting the historically secular schools toward tradition. He changed curriculums, replacing the study of Yiddish writers like Sholem Aleichem with Torah lessons. Local secular Jewish leaders opposed his actions, but to no avail. One Yiddishist, Mendel Mark,[[87: M. Marks, Di Yiddish-Veltliehke Shul in Leitland, 260–65. In 1935, the New York JTA news agency reported that the secular Jewish Parents Union had been disbanded and all educational programs were put in the hands of Agudath Israel. The conflict over the educational philosophy of the schools in Latvia was part of a broader culture war between traditional Jewish education and attempts to create a secular Jewish identity, untethered from Torah teachings and free of religious observance. In the US, groups like Der Arbeter Ring (The Workmen’s Circle) were established with Yiddish language and culture as their foundation. With time, the Yiddish movement faded, as its central idea – that language alone could be a bond powerful enough to sustain Jewish life – didn’t hold up.]] bemoaned the change, writing about the secular teachers being replaced by religious ones. “Prayer is now a requirement, and wearing a yarmulke is part of the dress code.” Mark wrote that some of the teachers staged a strike, but it did not hinder Hodakov’s plan to alter the educational philosophy of the schools.
The Rebbe was also critical of the defensive nature of the local Orthodox groups’ approach to community issues. He pushed for a change in tactics, to switch from passivity to more outward-facing activism. “You need to stand on the street corners and pull Jews into a synagogue to study,” he said, laying out the vision for a new, bold model of outreach that would become the symbol of Chabad in decades to come.[[88: This represents a fundamental shift in strategy for Jewish continuity. Instead of waiting for a Jew to walk into a synagogue, the Rebbe demanded outreach, even on the street. This was the beginning of a new paradigm in the battle against assimilation. In the decades to come, this strident outreach strategy of Chabad became commonplace, with menorahs gracing public squares and mitzvah tanks parked on street corners with Chasidim asking Jews to come aboard to do a mitzvah. In Russia, in a community where tradition was dominant and government oppression limited freedom of expression, this was never done. Now in a Western country where there was greater freedom, the Rebbe struck out in a new direction that, with time, would prove to be a game changer. The Ramash was present on that Simchat Torah in Riga, when the Rebbe demanded that Jews go out into the streets. Years later, once he became the seventh Rebbe, he initiated public mitzvah campaigns. The first was the tefillin campaign launched in the weeks prior to the Six-Day War in 1967, which entailed Jews donning tefillin even in public venues.]]
Toward the end of that Simchat Torah evening in 1930, the Rebbe’s tone turned ominous. In an uncharacteristically serious fashion, he demanded that those unwilling to lay tefillin daily or observe other basics of tradition not stay to dance with him that night. Those attending were taken aback by the Rebbe’s unusually harsh tone, and some indeed left before the traditional Simchat Torah dancing. One Jewish newspaper noted with disapproval that the Rebbe was not the progressive they thought he was, and this criticism was echoed in papers as far away as New York.[[89: The Forward, known for its hostility toward religion, was one paper that criticized the Rebbe for his severe tone that Simchat Torah.]] But soon it became clear to the Chasidim what had actually occurred. It was discovered that members of the local left-wing Jewish Communist youth club, Peretz, had planned to disrupt the celebration. “They infiltrated the crowd with the intent of cutting the electricity, and they planned to violently break up the hakafot,” Rabbi Yechezkel Feigin wrote to Rabbi Yisrael Jacobson in the US. “When the [Peretz] leaders heard the Rebbe’s strident words, they instructed their followers to leave.”[[90: Sefer HaSichos, 5688, 167, footnote 84. Letter from Feigin to Jacobson dated 26 Tishrei, 5691 (October 18, 1930).]]
On Friday, two days after the holiday, Rabbi Feigin decided to inform the Rebbe of the plot they had uncovered. “I thought it was important that he be aware, even though it would cause the Rebbe distress.” When he heard the details, the Rebbe said, “Now I know that I was justified in speaking that way, though at the time I did not know what pushed me to say it.”
The Rebbe was making headway, and not all were pleased. Alarmed at the new effort to boost Jewish education and observance, the left-wing Frimorgen paper headlined a story on the Rebbe’s growing influence in Riga, “The Rebbe’s Court in Riga a Danger to Cultural Life,” writing that when the Rebbe arrived in Riga, escaping a death sentence in Russia, he was warmly welcomed. Now that his influence was growing, he was endangering secular Jewish culture in Riga.
Riga was not just a geographic waystation but a spiritual one, where new ideas were launched and tested. It was removed from the large Jewish centers, with their rigid communal structure that could potentially stifle innovation. Despite believing that the optimal mode of Jewish education was the traditional yeshivah, the Rebbe advocated that the schools that integrated secular and religious education were better than the Yiddish schools that were Jewish in name only. The Rebbe also prodded Jewish activists in Latvia to reach beyond the walls of the synagogues. These were two new areas of innovation that the Rebbe embarked on while in Riga.
There were three others: creating a new chasidic historiography, broadening the dissemination of chasidic teachings beyond the chasidic community, and empowering women in the realm of Jewish study. In all five arenas, the Rebbe created a series of initiatives that with time would be key to reconstituting Chabad in Western democratic countries.
The ideas launched in Riga blossomed in both Europe and the US, and after the Rebbe’s passing, they were expanded by the seventh Rebbe.
Creating a new chasidic historiography
The Rebbe created a new literary tradition of chasidic historiography.[[91: In Poland, this expanded with the publication of Hatomim, the journal from Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim that began publishing in 1935. It included articles on Jewish scholarship, chasidic philosophy, and history, and has been republished in a two-volume set by Kehot Publication Society. For an overview of the history of Hatomim, see “A Light from Lubavitch: Hatomim – Our History, Heritage, and Scholarship,” available at: https://derher.org/wp-content/uploads/78-Adar-I-5779-overveiw-on-hatomim.pdf.]] In addition to teaching Torah, the Rebbe took the stories of the chasidic world, centuries of lore, and began to present them in systematic fashion in public talks. Those talks were published in booklets called Likkutei Dibburim.[[92: Likkutei Dibburim (literally, “A Collection of Talks”) includes the Rebbe’s talks between 1929 and 1950. They were first published first in Europe as booklets and eventually as volumes of a series, with the original language a mix of Hebrew and Yiddish. The six-volume set translated into English by Uri Kaploun was published by by Kehot Publication Society in 2012.]] “In letters and talks, he portrays the chasidic world vibrantly,” writes chasidic historian Menachem Bronfman. “He wrote with deep emotion, revealing the internal spiritual world of Chabad Chasidism through stories, and a tradition reaching back years.”[[93: https://www.alysefer.com/rebberayatz/.]]
Uri Kaploun, who translated those talks for publication, notes, “One is struck at once by the different nature of a farbrengen in those years.” The audience was varied; it included Torah scholars and average Jews, those who had experienced oppression in Russia and those who enjoyed the freedoms and prosperity of Western society. The mode of presentation was “deceptively simplistic. For the most part, he spurns the formality of learned quotation couched in technical terms, preferring a homely paraphrase, a pointed parable or a heartwarming anecdote.” The talks are diverse, embracing “childhood memories, insightful stories, the family traditions of tzaddikim, and recollections of Stalinist dungeons and interrogations.”[[94: Likkutei Dibburim, vol. 1, Translator’s Introduction (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2012).]]
These stories came from what the Rebbe himself heard as a young child from his father, grandmother, uncles, and older Chasidim.[[95: At times there are inconsistencies in the accounts that the Rebbe wrote, such as a slight difference in dates regarding events that happened decades earlier. The seventh Rebbe documented a series of these in an appendix to Chanokh LaNaar, an essay by the Rebbe Rashab on education. Some secular historians have argued that these inconsistencies call into question the Rebbe’s historical narrative. The seventh Rebbe profoundly disagreed; while acknowledging the discrepancies, he put his full faith behind the narrative. See Chanokh LaNaar [Hebrew] (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society), 56.]] “His keen curiosity first displayed itself in early childhood in the desire to hear historical tales from his grandmother,” writes Professor Ada Rapoport.[[96: Professor Ada Rapoport-Albert, Hasidic Studies: Essays in History and Gender (Littman Library of Jewish Civilization, 2018), chap. 4.]] The Rayatz would seek out the elder Chasidim during their spiritual pilgrimages in Lubavitch, listen to their stories, and then record them in his diary. Rapoport says this “developed into a compulsive interest in the personal reminiscences and oral traditions of his father and other senior figures at the Lubavitch court, whom he would interrogate about the early history of Chasidism.”
“Chabad Chasidism is not just deep intellectual philosophy but a recounting of stories from generation to generation,” Bronfman asserts. The Rebbe’s intent was to remind those who came from Russia of their marvelous chasidic legacy and at the same time, instill in the next generation of Chasidim, now living in urban centers in Latvia and Poland, the richness of chasidic life of the past. Bronfman explains that the Rebbe created a collective communal memory in order to bring this world to life for those who had never known it. The Rebbe was giving them a story, an identity, and showing them spiritual aspirations “as personified by the Chasidim of years earlier. The Rebbe succeeded in creating a living testimony of the heart of Chasidism and connecting the Chasidim reading those stories to a forgotten era.” The stories the Rebbe told added new dimensions to what many had studied in chasidic philosophy. “This created a foundation not only to appreciate the intellectual depth of Chabad but also the deep inner spiritual world of Chasidim.”[[97: https://www.alysefer.com/rebberayatz/.]]
Broadening the dissemination of chasidic teachings beyond the chasidic community
Chabad had existed for a century and half in Russia with few rival chasidic groups. After the Rebbe’s exodus from Russia, the differences between Chabad and the Polish chasidic groups, who were also influential in Riga, rose to the surface. Rapoport writes, “The encounter with all the Polish chasidic courts, some of them large and wealthy, in their native environment, to which Chabad was alien, and where it wielded little power or influence, forced the Rebbe to define its identity.” Chabad’s focus is on personal spiritual achievement, avodah, in the lexicon of Chasidism. As the Rebbe wrote, “One of the fundamental principles of Chabad is that it teaches its followers to be deeply engaged in the avodah of Chasidism. In contrast, for the Polish Chasidim, the main point is the connection to the Rebbe, and the Rebbe uplifts all those connected to him.”[[98: Igrot Kodesh 4:398, letter dated 18 Av, 5698 (August 15, 1938).]] Chabad teaches a Chasid to strive to internalize the ideals of Torah and serve G-d with his own efforts. Polish Chasidim, on the other hand, emphasize the bond with the Rebbe.
Therefore, Chabad concentrates on intellectual ideas, while the Polish Chasidim have a broad literature of the wondrous stories of tzaddikim. “The Polish Chasidim have focused their attention on the lives of their leader, their tales and deeds. They write down their stories of wonders. In Chabad we provide volumes of chasidic teachings, transcripts of maamarim.”
A few weeks before the High Holidays of September 1928, the Rebbe published his first maamar since leaving Russia.[[99: Known as maamar kinyan hachaim, its central themes are spiritual renewal and prayer. It was published for the first time as a booklet in September 1928 in Riga and reprinted in Sefer HaMaamarim – Kuntresim (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1962).]] And for the first time since the eighteenth century, a maamar was printed not in Hebrew but Yiddish, the language understood by average Jews,[[100: Author’s interview with Rabbi Eli Rubin.]] making the teachings of Chasidism accessible to a broader public.[[101: For an overview of translating chasidic teachings into other languages, see Eli Rubin, “A Linguistic Bridge Between Alienation and Intimacy: Chabad’s Theorization of Yiddish in Historical and Cultural Perspective,” available at: https://ingeveb.org/articles/a-linguistic-bridge-between-alienation-and-intimacy.]]
In the introduction to that particular maamar, the Rebbe reached out to a wider audience, some of whom had drifted from their chasidic roots. “My dear students and anash,” he wrote, “remember your historical roots, your parents and grandparents, Chasidim and Jews of outstanding spiritual character who studied Chasidism and lived up to its principles.” He asked them to “instill these teachings in your children,” urging parents to inculcate these ideals in the next generation, children growing up in Western Europe far from the Russian shtetl.
Then the Rebbe took it a step further, for the first time publishing chasidic discourses in a European language: German.[[102: In October 1929, the Rebbe wrote to Rabbi Meir Munk in Berlin, asking him to arrange for a translation of a maamar into German. Later, in 1936, the Ramash arranged for the translation of a maamar. See Zusha Wolf, Admorei Chabad VeYahadut Germania (Jerusalem: Heichal Menachem), part 3; Igrot Kodesh, vol. 16, letter dated 24 Tishrei, 5789 (October 8, 1929).]] The Rebbe wanted to engage German Jews, many of whom lacked a strong Jewish academic background, and give them the opportunity to gain an appreciation of the concepts of chasidic philosophy.
The seventh Rebbe notes[[103: Likkutei Sichot (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society), 35:294.]] that this was another step in disseminating chasidic teachings, a key principle of the founder of the chasidic movement, Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov. He explains that it was an evolutionary process.[[104: The seventh Rebbe refers to the historic letter sent by Rabbi Yisrael Baal Shem Tov to his brother, in which he describes a remarkable spiritual event that took place on Rosh HaShanah of 1746. The Baal Shem Tov says that using kabbalistic secrets, his soul rose to heaven. There he asked the Messiah, “When will you come?” He answered, “In the time when your teachings will become public and revealed in the world.” The Baal Shem Tov’s letter was published for the first time in 1781 by one of his disciples. This principle lies at the heart of the Chabad mission of disseminating the teachings of Chasidism to the world. For a copy of the letter, see “The Chamber of Mashiach,” available at: chabad.org/380401.]] “This has happened in stages, from generation to generation, the principle of disseminating Chasidism, reaching further outward.” He explains that the Baal Shem Tov focused on his students, spreading his teachings to them. A second transformation point was after the freeing of Rabbi Schneur Zalman from czarist prison in 1798. At that point, the Alter Rebbe began teaching maamarim with deeper explanations. “This began a new stage, when the teachings went chutzah, outside.” The next stage, says the seventh Rebbe, was the establishment of Yeshivas Tomchei Temimim in 1897. The yeshivah created a revolutionary curriculum that balanced talmudic study and chasidic philosophy. And the next step was publishing the maamarim in other languages. “It created a way for the teachings to be appreciated by all Jews, in their language.”
Empowering women in the realm of Jewish study
It was a woman, Sylvia Reinen,[[105: In a letter to Alexandar Sender Reinen, the Rebbe wrote: “A special blessing to your wife for her efforts translating the discourse…It will be a great merit that those who don’t understand another language are able to study it.” Igrot Kodesh, vol. 16, letter dated Tzom Gedalia, 3 Tishrei, 5689 (September 28, 1928).]] who translated the first maamar into Yiddish shortly after the Rebbe came to Riga. This marked the beginning of the effort to engage women with the intellectual depth of Chabad Chasidut. During his visit to the US in 1929, the Rebbe paid special attention to women. Levin writes, “In every place, the Rebbe encouraged the establishment of women’s organizations.”[[106: Rabbi Shalom Ber Levin, Toldot Chabad BeArtzot HaBrit (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1988), chap. 26.]] This empowerment of women was a new trend in the chasidic community. As Professor Rapoport writes, “There is no doubt the mobilization of women and the positive encouragement of female activism had become the pronounced policy of the sixth Rebbe.”[[107: Rapoport, Hasidic Studies, chap. 7.]]
In 1931, a large group of women requested that the Rebbe speak for them during his visit to Rokiškis, Lithuania. Rabbi Feigin writes, “In the wake of the request, the Rebbe spoke to a gathering of women.”[[108: Sefer HaMaamarim – Kuntresim (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 1962), 1:306.]] Historically, chasidic Rebbes only spoke before men in their public addresses; this was unprecedented. In the fall of 1935, Rabbi Mordechai Cheifetz asked the Rebbe if it was appropriate to teach women chasidic philosophy, and his answer was an emphatic yes. The Rebbe quoted his grandfather Rabbi Shmuel as saying that “amongst Chasidim there is no difference between a boy or a girl. Yet Chasidim only educate their sons in the ways of Chasidut; they totally neglect to educate their daughters in the ways of Chasidut.” The Rebbe lamented, “That was said fifty-five years ago, when the light of Chasidism was burning brightly in people’s homes. Now this is an even greater imperative.”[[109: Igrot Kodesh, vol. 3, letter dated 9 Kislev, 5696 (December 5, 1935).]] The Rebbe instructed Rabbi Cheifetz to study maamarim with his daughter. This directive would serve as the catalyst for the formation of the women’s group Achot Hatemimim (The Sisterhood of the Temimim),[[110: The exact date of the founding of the organization is difficult to determine. What is clear is that the Rebbe actively supported the group. By 1937, it was active in Riga, and branches were established in other cities as well. See Levin, Toldot Chabad BePolin, Lita, VeLatvia, chap. 13.]] which brought together teens and young women to strengthen their bond with chasidic tradition. The Rebbe strongly supported the group and encouraged women to set up classes on chasidic philosophy.[[111: Sarah Schenirer (1883–1935) pioneered Torah study for women by founding the first Bais Yaakov school in 1917 in Poland. The school focused on giving women basic skills in Jewish literacy, traditions, and history. However, those schools did not place an emphasis on chasidic theology. The Rebbe’s support of Achot Hatemimim promoted the serious study of chasidic texts and discourses like the Tanya. This was a revolutionary change in Jewish women’s scholarship. In modern Chabad women’s schools, chasidic philosophy is an integral part of the curriculum. The seventh Rebbe took this further by encouraging women to study Talmud.]] This created a gateway for them to delve deeper into the sea of Jewish mystical knowledge.
In the 1930s, the Rebbe printed more than forty discourses in Yiddish that were the “core material in this new initiative for Chabad women,” says Professor Naftali Loewenthal.[[112: Naftali Loewenthal, Hasidism Beyond Modernity: Essays in Habad Thought and History (London: Littman Library of Jewish Civilization, 2020), chap. 7.]] The Rebbe added prestige to the organization by appointing three distinguished Chasidim, Rabbis Mordechai Cheifetz, Chaim Eliyahu Althaus, and Avraham Eliyahu Asherov, to serve as mentors for the women. The Rebbe encouraged them to hold their own farbrengens, which according to Loewenthal was a key “to the process of internalization of chasidic ethos” and also fostered “unity between the participants.”
In the summer of 1938, a women’s group was founded in the US, and the Rebbe wrote to them in English. “In reply to your letter advising me of your excellent resolution to interest yourselves in the study of Chasidism and to be called The Society of the Sisters of the Temimim, I was greatly gratified with your good decision.”[[113: Igrot Kodesh 4:362, letter dated 27 Sivan, 5698 (June 26, 1938).]] As the Rebbe had done in Europe, he selected three prominent American rabbis to teach the group and advise them on format and curriculum, instructing them to set up weekly classes.[[114: The Rebbe appointed a committee of three prominent Chabad rabbis, Yisrael Jacobson, Yisrael Kazarnovsky, and Yochanan Gordon, to teach and advise Achot Hatemimim in the US. As in Riga, the Rebbe selected prestigious scholars, a clear indication of the great value he saw in developing educational opportunities for women. Igrot Kodesh, vol. 4, letter dated 27 Sivan, 5698 (June 26, 1938).]]
The Rebbe saw women’s study as an opportunity for the participants to enhance their spiritual identity. He expressed a desire for them to “comprehend the uniqueness of Chasidism, how it reveals rich spiritual depth.” The Rebbe also wanted the women to become activists. Loewenthal says he tasked them with the job of “organizing the translation of discourses and disseminating them.”[[115: Loewenthal, Hasidism Beyond Modernity, chap. 7.]] This new effort started a process of women evolving as teachers of chasidic philosophy and as mashpios, spiritual mentors. The Rebbe also published public letters and booklets of chasidic teachings specifically for women. In the fall of 1941, it was the members of Achot Hatemimim of Greater New York who went on to establish the Beis Rivkah schools.
The great importance the Rebbe placed on creating educational opportunities for women became clear during his second interlude in Riga in 1940. After escaping German-occupied Poland, he made few public appearances during his short stay before departing to the US. One of these was a rare public talk to Achot Hatemimim in Riga. Before the Rebbe spoke, he requested that a representative of each class review the maamar they were studying from memory, something radical at the time.[[116: For a young teenage girl to review a maamar in front of the Rebbe must have been a very intimidating experience. Clearly the Rebbe was attempting to empower these young women with the courage to pursue serious Jewish learning.]] Loewenthal explains, “Recital of a discourse by heart was something for which the young men of Tomchei Temimim were well-known. Now girls were doing it as well.”
Afterward, the Rebbe addressed[[117: Sefer HaSichos, 5696–5700 (Brooklyn, NY: Kehot Publication Society, 2012), 401.]] the women as he would a group of male Chasidim, Loewenthal says. The Rebbe stressed the importance of studying chasidic philosophy to develop their inner spiritual qualities while following the teachings of the Torah.[[118: This was a period where few women were immersed in serious Jewish intellectual study. The initiative to promote the study of chasidic philosophy, started by the Rebbe in Riga and continued in the US, was an unprecedented innovation of Jewish learning for women.]] Loewenthal explains, “The ultimate goal was one of empowerment and activism while maintaining the conventional structure of society.”
Riga was the testing ground for many of the ideas that emerged in the coming years. The Rebbe’s involvement with the educational system in Riga set the tone for a similar system integrating religious and secular education that the Rebbe went on to establish in the US. While in other chasidic groups, women saw themselves as the wives or daughters of Chasidim, Loewenthal says the Rebbe empowered women in Chabad to see themselves as Chasidim in their own merit.[[119: Loewenthal, Hasidism Beyond Modernity, 294. Loewenthal quotes one teacher in the chasidic group of Ger: “You know, after all, that there are no women Chasidim, right? There are only daughters and wives of Chasidim.”]] Other ideas, such as translating chasidic teachings, taking a more strident approach to outreach, and creating new chasidic literature, expanded in the years that followed.
All these initiatives point to the Rebbe’s creative approach to the new challenges of Western society. Chabad adapted to a changing reality in a diverse modern world, where Jews were no longer forced inward because of outside limitations on their freedoms. While most chasidic Rebbes focused on the needs of their constituencies, the Rebbe launched ideas that transcended his community. While still in Russia, the Rebbe rejected the parochialism of the roshei yeshivah (heads of yeshivas) who fled the country and abandoned the wider community to protect their institutions. Instead, he created a comprehensive strategy to save Russian Jewry. And when he arrived in Riga, suffering from weakened health due to the oppression in Russia, and with no finances to speak of, he did not withdraw or back down. The Rebbe actively led the effort to support the scattered communities materially and spiritually and engage Jews in a time when Jewish communal structure was breaking down and many were drifting away from observance. Through letters, directives, emissaries, and personal visits, he sought to uplift the standards of Jewish education and observance in the Jewish communities of Russia, Latvia, and its environs, all the way to the US. This approach of taking responsibility for the broader Jewish destiny defined the Rebbe’s leadership and became Chabad’s unique modus operandi in the generations to come.
Riga saw the cultivation of important personalities, such as Rabbi Chaim Mordechai Aizik Hodakov[[120: Rabbi Hodakov was born to a Chabad family in the Russian town of Beshankovich on January 12, 1902. His family moved to Riga when he was two years old, and he was educated there by Rabbi Yoel Barantchik of the Novardok Musar movement. He excelled in his studies and religious devotion. When the Rebbe arrived in Riga in 1928, Rabbi Hodakov became an ardent Chasid. During this time, he met the Ramash. In 1934, Rabbi Hodakov was named chief inspector of the Jewish schools by the Latvian Ministry of Education. He eventually accompanied the Rebbe to America in 1940, assisting the Ramash in an effort to establish the first national Jewish school system in the US. After the passing of the Rebbe Rayatz, Rabbi Hodakov became the chief of staff and secretary of the seventh Rebbe. In this role, he oversaw the growth of Chabad around the world. He passed away on April 23, 1993.]] and Dr. Nissan Mindel,[[121: Dr. Nissan Mindel was born in Riga in 1912. As a young man, he met the Rebbe when he arrived from Russia. Mindel received a master’s degree from the University of Manchester and a doctorate in Semitic languages from Columbia University. Prior to World War II, he served as a secretary for the Rebbe in Otwock and accompanied him on the ship to the US in 1940. Mindel continued in that capacity, and when the Rebbe Rayatz passed away, he transitioned to working as a secretary for the seventh Rebbe. Mindel also served on the boards of the central organizations of Chabad, Merkos L’Inyonei Chinuch and Agudas Chassidei Chabad. He translated the chasidic classic, the Tanya, into English and wrote many important works on chasidic history and philosophy. He passed away in 1999.]] who became the Rebbe’s devoted Chasidim, eventually joining him when he escaped to the US. There they rose to positions of leadership: Mindel was a secretary for both the sixth Rebbe and the seventh Rebbe, and Hodakov played a key role in the Rebbe’s efforts to develop Jewish education in the US in the early 1940s. Later, Rabbi Hodakov assumed the position of the seventh Rebbe’s chief of staff.
Decades later, the inspiration of the Rebbe’s sojourn was still felt in Riga. Rabbi Dr. Aaron Rakeffet[[122: Author’s interview with Rakeffet in Jerusalem in 2019. Rakeffet is a protege of Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik, and is one of the most authoritative historians of Orthodox Jewish history and a prolific author. For a detailed description of his missions to Russia on behalf of the Mossad, see Kuntres Rakafot Aharon (Jerusalem, 2019), vol. 4, chap. 5.]] discovered its long-lasting effects when he visited Riga in 1985, when he was sent to the Soviet Union as a covert agent by the Israeli Mossad. His mission was to connect with Jews, strengthen Judaism, and help with immigration to Israel. He was surprised to find a vibrant community in Riga. At the synagogue, he discovered a group of older Jews, the nucleus of the religious life that had held on throughout Communism. After services, he was quietly told, “When they leave, we’ll go upstairs.” He understood that among the worshippers were government agents and that when they departed, the group would be able to speak more freely. After the services concluded, “they broke out vodka and cake, and we sat and had a farbrengen. We talked about the Rebbe, told stories, and shared words of Torah and inspiration. It was like we were transported to another world.” The richness of tradition that they had absorbed during the Rebbe’s six-year stay in Riga was still pulsating half a century later among the local observant Jews. “It’s what kept them going all those years,” Rakeffet attests.

